June 16, 2025

DESY-25-049

arXiv:2506.13874v2 [hep-ph] 23 Oct 2025

Theory Uncertainties in the Extraction of αs from
Drell-Yan at Small Transverse Momentum

Thomas Cridge,a Giulia Marinelli,b and Frank J. Tackmannb
a

Elementary Particle Physics, University of Antwerp,
Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium
b
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

E-mail: thomas.cridge@uantwerpen.be, giulia.marinelli@desy.de,
frank.tackmann@desy.de
Abstract: We perform a detailed pseudodata study to estimate the expected theory
uncertainty in the extraction of the strong coupling constant, αs (mZ ), from a fit to the
measured Drell-Yan transverse momentum (qT ) spectrum at small qT ≪ mZ . We consider
two approaches to estimate the dominant perturbative uncertainties. We first discuss that
the traditional approach based on varying unphysical scales is insufficient here because it
cannot correctly account for bin-by-bin theory correlations in the qT spectrum, which are
critically important in this case. We then use this case as a nontrivial application of a new
approach based on theory nuisance parameters (TNPs), which encodes the correct theory
correlations by construction. Moreover, the TNPs can be profiled in the fit thereby allowing
the data to constrain the theory uncertainties in a consistent manner. We furthermore
discuss the interplay with nonperturbative effects in the peak region qT ≲ 10 GeV, from
where most of the αs sensitivity originates. The associated nonperturbative uncertainties
on αs when fitting only the qT spectrum are large. They can in principle be reduced by
including additional constraints on the nonperturbative Collins-Soper kernel from lattice
QCD calculations. We find that these improvements in the treatment of perturbative and
nonperturbative uncertainties and their correlations will enable a competitive αs extraction
from Drell-Yan data at small qT . We also discuss the implications of our findings, calling
into question a recent αs extraction from the Z qT spectrum by the ATLAS experiment.
ArXiv ePrint: 2506.13874

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 Theory Uncertainties and Correlations for Differential Spectra
2.1 Theory correlations
2.2 Limitations of scale variations
2.3 Theory nuisance parameters

4
4
6
9

3 Theory Description and Pseudodata Setup
3.1 Theory requirements
3.2 Resummation of perturbative contributions at small qT
3.2.1 Resummation
3.2.2 Scale variations
3.2.3 TNPs for qT resummation
3.3 Nonperturbative effects
3.3.1 General discussion
3.3.2 Nonperturbative parameterization
3.4 Asimov fit setup
3.4.1 General discussion
3.4.2 Fit setup

11
11
12
13
15
16
19
19
20
22
22
24

4 Perturbative Uncertainties
4.1 Scale variations
4.2 Theory nuisance parameters
4.2.1 Scanning
4.2.2 Profiling
4.2.3 Profiling against N4 LL
4.2.4 Dependence on pre-fit theory constraints

24
25
26
27
28
30
33

5 Nonperturbative Effects

35

6 Conclusions

38

A Comments on Recent αs Extraction by ATLAS
A.1 Perturbative uncertainties from scale variations
A.2 Different N4 LL countings and approximation uncertainties
A.3 Effects due to finite bottom and charm quark masses
A.4 Nonperturbative model

40
41
43
47
48

B Additional Results
B.1 Nonsingular power corrections
B.2 Approximate TNP orders

49
49
50

–1–

References

1

53

Introduction

The strong coupling constant αs , which parameterizes the strength of the strong interactions, is the least well known among the fundamental forces of nature. Its precise
determination has thus been of great interest with many complementary determinations
from different sources being pursued over the years [1]. The current world average of
αs (mZ ) = 0.1180(9) [2] has a relative uncertainty of 0.8%, with the most precise result
stemming from the average of lattice QCD determinations αs (mZ ) = 0.1183(7) (0.6%) [3].
One of the currently most precise determinations from experimental measurements
at colliders comes from fits to hadronic event shapes in e+ e− collisions [4], most notably
a determination from the thrust distribution [5–7] yielding αs (mZ ) = 0.1136(12) with a
precision of about 1%, which however has shown a persistent tension with the world average, despite much theoretical scrutiny [7–15]. An independent determination of similarly
high precision at or below the one-percent level from collider measurements is thus of
great importance. A promising candidate for such a high-precision determination is the
transverse-momentum (qT ) spectrum in Drell-Yan production, which has been measured
to subpercent precision at the LHC [16–24] and for which theoretical predictions have been
reaching the same N3 LL′ and (approximate) N4 LL resummation as for e+ e− event shapes
resulting in a perturbative precision at the few-percent level [25–32].
The sensitivity to αs in the qT spectrum arises solely from higher-order QCD corrections. A robust theoretical description of the qT spectrum is thus mandatory to obtain
a reliable extraction of αs (mZ ). It requires in particular a reliable treatment of theory
uncertainties and their correlations. The dominant αs sensitivity is a subtle shape effect
in the peak of the spectrum – a change in αs effectively shifts the peak of the spectrum.
Since the αs dependence is intimately tied to the perturbative expansion itself, missing
higher-order terms can closely mimic the effect of changing the value of αs . Furthermore,
nonperturbative effects induce a similar shape effect in the peak of the spectrum. Hence,
for a reliable αs determination it is vital to reliably distinguish the shape effects induced by
changing αs from those induced by missing higher-order corrections or by nonperturbative
effects, so we must be able to correctly account for the latter two. This means it is critically
important to account for the correct point-by-point (or bin-by-bin) theory correlations in
the qT spectrum, which are determined by the precise shape of the individual components
of the theory uncertainty.
The traditional approach to estimate perturbative theory uncertainties based on scale
variations suffers from well-known limitations: The estimated uncertainties are not very
meaningful, and in particular they fundamentally lack a proper account of theory correlations. As discussed in section 2.2, the underlying reason is that the scales that are
being varied are unphysical and not actual parameters of the calculation. Their variation

–2–

cannot be interpreted like that of an ordinary parameter whose uncertainty is being propagated. One consequence is that scale variations do not provide the correct shape of the
missing higher-order terms. Given the critical importance of accounting for the correct
point-by-point theory correlations, the scale-variation approach is basically ill-suited for
this application. We find that the perturbative uncertainty on αs (mZ ) one might derive
based on scale variations is indeed not reliable and quite arbitrary due to it being subject
to uncontrolled correlation assumptions. For example, a recent extraction from Drell-Yan
measurements at small qT claimed a record precision of αs (mZ ) = 0.1183(9) [33], as precise
as the current world average. However, as discussed in detail in appendix A, it relies on a
particular scale-variation recipe as well as other questionable assumptions, so the quoted
uncertainty on αs (mZ ) cannot be taken at face value.
The new approach of theory nuisance parameters (TNPs) introduced in Ref. [34] overcomes the limitations of scale variations and provides meaningful theory uncertainties including in particular correct theory correlations. The purpose of our paper is thus twofold:
Our first goal is to demonstrate the performance and robustness of TNPs in a real-world
application that demands meaningful theory uncertainties and correlations. We find that
the TNPs perform as advertised. Our second goal is to estimate the theory uncertainties
in αs (mZ ) we can expect to achieve. To do so we perform a detailed study using socalled Asimov fits to (unfluctuated) pseudodata. This is a standard procedure to estimate
expected uncertainties in a clean and controlled environment that is unobscured by statistical fluctuations in the data and unbiased by subleading effects that are present in the
real data and not (yet) accounted for in the theoretical description. In our case, it allows
us to study in a theoretically fully controlled environment the dominant perturbative and
nonperturbative uncertainties in the qT spectrum and their propagation to and impact on
αs (mZ ). In particular, by profiling the TNPs in the fit and by incorporating lattice QCD
constraints on nonperturbative parameters, we expect that it will be possible in the future
to achieve sufficiently small theory uncertainties to allow for an extraction of αs (mZ ) from
the Drell-Yan qT spectrum that is competitive with other measurements. It remains to
be seen whether or not it will be possible to reach or beat the precision of lattice QCD
determinations or the world average.
We use the binning and experimental uncertainties of the recent ATLAS 8 TeV inclusive measurement [19] as a representative example for our Asimov study. This choice
is partially motivated by the fact that the same dataset was used in Ref. [33]. Our exact numerical results of course depend on this choice and will change by including other
datasets. However, our overall qualitative findings on the robustness (or lack thereof) and
performance of the different theory uncertainty approaches hold in general.
The dominant perturbative and nonperturbative uncertainties we wish to address enter
via the dominant leading-power resummed contribution to the small-qT spectrum, which
is therefore the focus of our investigations. In the appendix, we also briefly consider
subdominant effects from power corrections suppressed by O(qT2 /m2Z ) and finite quark
masses relevant for qT2 ∼ m2c , m2b . While it is important to include these effects to obtain
a percent-level or better description of the real data, we can drop them in our main study
since we consistently drop them in both our pseudodata and our fitted theory model.

–3–

Another important source of uncertainty is due to the limited knowledge of parton
distribution functions (PDFs), which are required inputs for such hadron collider determinations of αs (mZ ). The PDFs themselves have a dependence on αs [35–39], and this nontrivial PDF-αs correlation must be propagated faithfully to the extracted output αs (mZ ).
Whilst the propagation of these uncertainties is in principle a more straightforward exercise, in practice it faces some nontrivial caveats. We therefore do not consider them here
but will address them in a dedicated paper [40].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we discuss in more
detail the general issue of theory uncertainties and their correlations for differential spectra, the limitations of scale variations, and the general ideas behind the TNP approach. In
section 3, we summarize our theory and pseudodata setup. We then discuss in section 4
the treatment of perturbative uncertainties in the extraction of αs and including nonperturbative uncertainties in section 5. We conclude in section 6. Appendix A provides a
detailed discussion of the estimation of theory uncertainties in Ref. [33] in comparison to
our own analysis. In appendix B we collect some additional numerical results.

2

Theory Uncertainties and Correlations for Differential Spectra

In this section, we provide a brief general discussion of perturbative theory uncertainties
for the case of a differential spectrum. The discussion here is largely adapted from sections
2 and 3 of Ref. [34], to which we refer for a more in-depth discussion. In section 2.1, we
highlight the importance of theory correlations. In section 2.2 we discuss the limitations of
scale variations, and in section 2.3 we discuss the approach of theory nuisance parameters.
We consider a differential quantity f (x) that depends on some variable x, and its
perturbative expansion in a small parameter α,
f (x, α) = f0 (x) + f1 (x) α + f2 (x) α2 + f3 (x) α3 + O(α4 ) .

(2.1)

We will generically use fn (x) to denote the expansion coefficients and specifically fˆn (x)
to denote their true values. Calculating the first few true coefficients, we obtain a theory
prediction for f (x) at leading order (LO), next-to-leading order (NLO), next-to-next-toleading order (NNLO), and so on,
LO:
NLO:
NNLO:

f (x, α) = fˆ0 (x) ,
f (x, α) = fˆ0 (x) + fˆ1 (x) α ,
f (x, α) = fˆ0 (x) + fˆ1 (x) α + fˆ2 (x) α2 .

(2.2)

The perturbative theory uncertainty we wish to discuss in the following is due to the fact
that the predictions are only approximations to the exact result because of truncating the
series at a certain order.
2.1

Theory correlations

Theory correlations, namely the correlations in the theory uncertainties of different predictions, are in principle required whenever several predictions are used at the same time,

–4–

ρ

99.5%

98%

95.5%

87.5%

δf /g /δ

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.5

Table 1. Dependence of the relative uncertainty of the ratio f /g on the correlation ρ, see text for
details.

for example when one performs a simultaneous interpretation of several measurements. A
standard example is the interpretation of a differential spectrum, which requires point-bypoint (or bin-by-bin) theory correlations across the spectrum.
To appreciate the potential importance of correlations, first consider the case of two
observables f and g that have both a relative uncertainty δf = δg = δ with correlation ρ.
The relative uncertainty of their ratio, δf /g , as a function of ρ is given by
δf /g = δ

p
2(1 − ρ) .

(2.3)

When ρ is close to 1, i.e., in the limit of strong correlation, δf /g is very sensitive to the
precise value of ρ, as illustrated in table 1, because the square root becomes infinitely steep
for ρ → 1.
The different points (or bins) of a differential spectrum f (x) are a priori separate
observables. When obtaining a theory prediction for f (x) we are actually obtaining predictions simultaneously for many separate (though closely related) observables f (xi ). The
question of how well the shape of f (x) is known then corresponds to the question of how the
theory uncertainties at different points in the spectrum are correlated. That is, f ≡ f (xi )
and g ≡ f (xj ) now correspond to the prediction of the spectrum at any two points xi and
xj , and the shape of the spectrum is equivalent to the ratio f (xi )/f (xj ).
As an illustration, consider the case where we have the same relative uncertainty δ at all
points. Let ρij denote the correlation between the uncertainties of f (xi ) and f (xj ). In the
extreme case where the uncertainties at all points are 100% correlated, ρij = 1, the shape of
the spectrum would be known exactly with vanishing uncertainty and δ would correspond
to a pure overall normalization uncertainty. In the other extreme where the uncertainties
are completely uncorrelated among all points, ρij = 0, the shape would be completely
unknown within an overall band of relative size δ. In practice, the theory predictions for
neighboring points (or bins) are closely related, so we naturally expect their uncertainties
to be strongly correlated. We are thus precisely in the limit of strong correlations, and
so the precise point-by-point (or bin-by-bin) correlations are crucial to correctly account
for the shape uncertainty. Just like for the ratio f /g in table 1, tiny differences in the
point-by-point correlations can lead to dramatically different shape uncertainties.
It is important to realize that different quantities, including neighboring points or bins
in a spectrum, do not by themselves have a notion of being correlated with each other.
The only thing that can be correlated are their uncertainties. More precisely, the impact
of a common source of uncertainty is fully correlated between different quantities that
depend on that same source. This is fundamentally the only way a correlation can arise.
For example, neighboring bins measured by strictly independent experiments will have

–5–

uncorrelated experimental uncertainties, because they do not share a common source of
uncertainty. Since two neighboring bins tend to be very similar observables, their theory
predictions tend to involve common ingredients with a similar impact on both bins. This
is the (only) reason why we expect their theory uncertainties to be strongly correlated.
More generally, when different quantities depend on several independent sources of
uncertainty, the correlation of their total uncertainty depends on the relative size of the
various fully correlated impacts from each source. In terms of covariance matrices, the
total covariance matrix is the sum of several 100% correlated ones, which is in general not
100% correlated anymore. It then follows that to obtain the correct theory correlations for
a differential spectrum we have to break down the total theory uncertainty into (mutually
independent) components, where each component corresponds to a well-defined common
source of uncertainty so it is fully correlated across the spectrum. The shapes of the
components, reflecting the impact of their respective sources across the spectrum, can be
different and their combination then determines the net point-by-point correlations of the
total theory uncertainty. As we will discuss in section 2.3, theory nuisance parameters
are constructed exactly to provide this breakdown. In contrast, as discussed next, scale
variations do not provide the means for such a breakdown.
2.2

Limitations of scale variations

The series coefficients in Eq. (2.1) depend on the precise way of performing the expansion,
i.e., the perturbative scheme we use, which corresponds to the precise choice or definition of
the expansion parameter α. We can define a new scheme by defining a different expansion
parameter α̃,


α̃(α) = α 1 + b0 α + b1 α2 + b2 α3 + O(α4 ) ,
(2.4)
which is fully specified by the coefficients bk . For scale variations in QCD, α ≡ αs (µ0 )
corresponds to the strong coupling at the chosen central scale µ0 , α̃ ≡ αs (µ) is the coupling
at some other scale µ, and the bk are given in terms of the QCD beta function coefficients
βk as
β0 µ0
ln
= 0.85 L ,
2π
µ
β2
µ0
β1
µ0
b1 = 02 ln2
+ 2 ln
= 0.72 L2 + 0.34 L ,
4π
µ
8π
µ
β2
β3
µ0 5β0 β1 2 µ0
µ0
b2 = 03 ln3
+
ln
+
ln
= 0.61 L3 + 0.72 L2 + 0.13 L .
2
3
8π
µ
32π
µ
32π
µ

b0 =

(2.5)

For illustration, in the second equalities on the right-hand side we plugged in nf = 5 and
used L ≡ ln(µ0 /µ)/ ln 2, so the usual convention corresponds to varying L = ±1.
As long as the bk in Eq. (2.4) are O(1), α̃ only differs from α by higher-order terms
and should thus provide a similarly good expansion parameter. Using α̃ to perform the
perturbative expansion, we obtain different truncated predictions in terms of different

–6–

expansion coefficients f˜(x). For example, at NLO we have
ˆ
ˆ
NLO: f˜(x, α̃) = f˜0 (x) + f˜1 (x) α̃
= fˆ0 (x) + fˆ1 (x) α + b0 fˆ1 (x) α2 + b1 fˆ1 (x) α3 + O(α4 ).

(2.6)

In the second line we rewrote the predictions in terms of the original fˆn (x) and α. As
expected, to the order one is working, the predictions in different schemes agree but they
differ by higher-order terms beyond the nominal working order.
To all orders, the different expansions must give exactly the same result, f (x, α) =
˜
f (x, α̃) = f (x). The dependence on the scheme is thus an artifact of truncating the
series at a finite order. In the scale-variation approach, the residual scheme differences
are then exploited to provide an estimate of the theory uncertainty by taking ∆f (x, α) =
f˜(x, α̃) − f (x, α). For example, at NLO and NNLO this yields
NLO:
NNLO:

∆f (x, α) = b0 fˆ1 (x) α2 + b1 fˆ1 (x) α3 + O(α4 ) ,

∆f (x, α) = 2b0 [fˆ2 (x) − b0 fˆ1 (x)] + b1 fˆ1 (x) α3 + O(α4 ) .

(2.7)

The resulting uncertainty estimate is automatically of the correct one higher order, ∆f (x, α) ∼
O(αn+1 ) at Nn LO, which makes this approach very convenient to use in practice.
However, the scale-variation approach suffers from well-known limitations. The parameters bk , or in case of QCD the single parameter L in Eq. (2.5), are a priori arbitrary
and contain no information on the actual missing higher-order terms. At NLO for example
there is nothing that guarantees that b0 fˆ1 (x) is a good estimate of fˆ2 (x) in any way. In
fact, typically f2 (x) will have a (much) more complicated x dependence than f1 (x) and
will not just be proportional to it. As a result, Eq. (2.7) does not provide a very reliable
uncertainty estimate. Typical pitfalls leading to an underestimation are when a lower-order
fˆ≤n (x) happens to be accidentally small (e.g. in the vicinity of zero-crossings) or when
fn+1 (x) contains new structures not present in f≤n (x).
While one might be able to avoid these pitfalls of underestimation, there is a more
severe limitation of scale variations, which is fundamental and unavoidable: The bk (or L)
are unphysical parameters. That is, they are artificially introduced via the scheme change,
but they are not actual parameters of f (x) with an existing but unknown true value. While
there might be a certain value of L for which ∆f (xi , α) coincides with the true value of the
missing higher-order term(s) for a specific xi , this value of L will be different for different
xi . There may also be no (reasonable) value of L for which this is the case. Therefore,
the resulting variation ∆f (x, α) in Eq. (2.7) cannot be interpreted as a fully correlated
uncertainty like the variation due to an ordinary parameter whose uncertainty is being
propagated. In other words, Eq. (2.7) does not provide a correct parameterization of the x
dependence of the missing higher-order terms, which however would be necessary to obtain
the correct theory correlation structure in x [34].
Oftentimes, including for our case of interest, predictions involve multiple scale parameters (e.g. due to making separate choices of the expansion parameter in different parts
of the calculation). The standard approach to mitigate the danger of misestimation is by

–7–

ρ12

ρ13

ρ23

a

0

−1

0

b

+1

+1

+1

c

+1

−1

−1

Figure 1. Interpreting a differential spectrum by scanning scale variations. Left: The theory
prediction (black line) with a theory uncertainty band (blue) from the envelope of scale variations
compared to measurements (red) at three points x1,2,3 . Middle: The normalized uncertainty band
(blue) with three possible scale variations (orange, green, violet) filling out the band. Right: The
assumed correlations ρij between the uncertainties at the points xi and xj resulting from a given
scale variation. Note that for ρij = 0 the uncertainty at either xi or xj must vanish.

considering a variety of different variations of all relevant scales in some fashion to obtain
a variety of different results f˜k (x). The uncertainty estimate is then obtained by taking
the envelope over all variations1
∆fk (x) = f˜k (x) − fdefault (x) ,

∆f (x) = max ∆fk (x) .
k

(2.8)

The hope is that at any given xi there will be at least one variation ∆fk (x), not necessarily
the same for all xi , that gives a reasonable upper limit for the possible size of the missing
higher-order terms. Taking the envelope then ensures that the total uncertainty does not
scale with the number of considered variations, which is in principle arbitrary. Performing
as many as possible different types of variations (as opposed to merely increasing the size of
variation) will then generically improve the reliability of the estimate. This is particularly
true in situations (including our case of interest) where individual ∆fk (x) tend to cross
through zero at some xi and thus individually grossly underestimate the uncertainty around
that point.
However, even assuming that the final envelope ∆f (x) provides a reasonable theory
uncertainty for the spectrum at any given xi , the key question is how to propagate this
uncertainty from the spectrum to the parameter of interest when performing an interpretation, which as discussed in section 2.1 requires the correct point-by-point correlations
across the spectrum, i.e., the correlation between ∆f (xi ) and ∆f (xj ) for any two xi and
xj . This is where we run afoul of the fundamental lack of correlations in the scale-variation
approach.
A common method to “propagate” the scale-variation envelope from the spectrum to
the parameters of interest is by scanning over scale variations. That is, the interpretation
is repeated for all predictions f˜k (x) that fill out the envelope. The various different results
1

Here we take the default result as the central value and the maximum absolute difference as its symmetric uncertainty. Other ways to construct the envelope are also used, further demonstrating the arbitrary
nature of these prescriptions. However, the precise way of doing so is irrelevant for our discussion.

–8–

obtained for the parameters of interest are then enveloped to give an estimate of the theory uncertainty on the parameters of interest. This method is however insufficient due to
the fundamental limitations discussed above: Since the underlying scales are unphysical
parameters, the resulting variations ∆fk (x) do not correspond to well-defined fully correlated uncertainty components or sources. Rather they merely provide different ways to
probe the possible size of the total theory uncertainty. This is exactly why we take their
envelope instead of adding them in quadrature. In other words, by taking an envelope we
explicitly acknowledge the fact that the individual ∆fk (x), and the point-by-point correlation they would imply, are not particularly meaningful and that they do not correspond
to well-defined uncertainty components. Otherwise we would combine them in quadrature.
Therefore, scanning over scale variations does not provide the necessary breakdown of the
total uncertainty into uncertainty components.
Instead, this scanning over enveloped variations amounts to trying out various correlation models for the same total uncertainty band, as illustrated in figure 1. We might then
wonder what we can learn from this. First, it is important to realize that none of the trial
variations actually provides a realistic correlation model, because as seen in figure 1, they
are by construction always fully correlated, only allowing correlations ρij = ±1 (or ρij = 0
in case ∆f (xi,j ) = 0). This is clearly problematic when one is sensitive to shape effects,
where as discussed in section 2.1, the precise correlation near ρ = 1 completely determines
the resulting shape uncertainty and thus the impact on the parameter of interest. Therefore any given variation with its implied correlation model can strongly underestimate (or
overestimate) the resulting theory uncertainty on the parameter of interest. One might be
“lucky” such that one trial variation sufficiently closely mimics the shape effect of the parameter of interest so as to yield a “conservative” uncertainty and avoid underestimation.
However, this might just as well be very “unlucky” and yield a substantial overestimation.
In summary, scale variations provide no means to correctly address the problem of
theory correlations. Therefore, when theory correlations are important, or even critical as
in cases like ours when looking for shape effects, they cannot be used to reliably propagate
the theory uncertainties from the original spectrum to the parameters of interest. One
might wonder why this fundamental lack of theory correlations in scale variations is then
not discussed more often. The main reasons might be that theory correlations are often
either not as important or not recognized to be important, or simply because there has
not been an alternative so far. There are however other cases, some of which quite similar
to ours, where the lack of theory correlations in scale variations has been well recognized
to be problematic or limiting. To mitigate these problems, the best that can be done with
scale variations is to impose an explicit and case-specific correlation model on the theory
uncertainty, see e.g. Refs. [7, 41–52]. In comparison, by scanning over scale variations one
basically relies on some implicit ad hoc theory correlation model.
2.3

Theory nuisance parameters

The limitations of scale variations have led to a variety of alternative methods being explored over the years [53–58] including the TNP approach [34, 59–64]. Among the motivations for the latter is to allow one to properly account for theory correlations.

–9–

The fundamental source of the perturbative theory uncertainty is not the choice of scale
or perturbative scheme. Rather, the actual sources of uncertainty in any particular scheme
are its missing unknown fˆn (x). To be able to correctly account for the theory uncertainty,
we have to actually include the (leading) source(s) of uncertainty in our predictions. To do
so, compared to Eq. (2.2) we have to include (at least) the next term in the series, which
contains the dependence on the unknown series coefficient fn (x). This is the starting point
of the TNP approach [34]. To obtain a perturbative prediction for f (x) at order Nm+k LO,
we include the true values of the first m series coefficients and in addition the next k ≥ 1
terms whose coefficients are unknown. We are typically in a regime where the next order
is the dominant source of uncertainty, in which case k = 1, so the predictions in Eq. (2.2)
turn into

N1+1 LO:

f (x, α, θ1 ) = fˆ0 (x) + f1 (x, θ1 ) α ,
f (x, α, θ2 ) = fˆ0 (x) + fˆ1 (x) α + f2 (x, θ2 ) α2 ,

N2+1 LO:

f (x, α, θ3 ) = fˆ0 (x) + fˆ1 (x) α + fˆ2 (x) α2 + f3 (x, θ3 ) α3 .

N0+1 LO:

(2.9)

Here, the (considered to be) unknown series coefficients fn (x, θn ) are parameterized in
terms of theory nuisance parameters θn , where for simplicity we let θn ≡ {θn,i } denote an
appropriate set of parameters θn,i that are by construction scalars [34].
A key condition that the TNP parameterization fn (x, θn ) has to satisfy is that there
must exist true values θ̂n for which the true value fˆn (x) is reproduced,
fˆn (x) = fn (x, θ̂n ) .

(2.10)

This condition implies that the TNPs are true parameters of the perturbative series. As for
any other ordinary parameter, we can assign to them a best estimate with some uncertainty,
θn = un ± ∆un ,

(2.11)

which can come from theory considerations or experimental constraints or both. Without
loss of generality we will assume that, prior to applying any experimental constraints, the
θn are chosen such that based on theory information only we have un = 0 and ∆un ≡
∆θn = 1.2
The central prediction then corresponds to setting the θn to their central values. Note
that in general we can have fn (x, θn = 0) ̸= 0, so the central prediction at say N2+1 LO
does not necessarily coincide with the previous N2 LO prediction without TNPs. This is
not a bug but a feature, because the TNP parameterization allows us to correctly include
contributions that are already known, e.g. from lower-order terms. On the other hand,
Eq. (2.10) implies that when evaluated at the true values θ̂n , the N2+1 LO result agrees
with the N3 LO result.
The condition in Eq. (2.10) ensures that the θn are well-defined common parameters
for the predictions at different x. Their unknown value therefore represents a common
Starting from a theory constraint un ± ∆un for θn , we can always reparameterize it as θn′ = (θn −
un )/∆un , such that the corresponding constraint on θn′ is 0 ± 1.
2

– 10 –

source of uncertainty whose impact is 100% correlated across all x. At the same time,
different individual θn,i are a priori mutually independent, so they can be varied separately
and the impacts of different θn,i are a priori fully uncorrelated. The theory uncertainty
can thus be evaluated by propagating the uncertainties ∆un through the interpretation to
the parameters of interest using any desired standard method for error propagation and
combination. In particular, they can be consistently treated and profiled in fits to data
like any other nuisance parameters. In this case, their post-fit uncertainties can of course
become correlated, which one has to properly account for when combining uncertainties.
Theory-based constraints inevitably involve some human prejudice (unless they come
from calculations that are either exact or numerically approximate with a well-defined numerical uncertainty). As shown in Ref. [34], it is nevertheless possible to obtain reliable
and statistically meaningful theory constraints. When the TNPs are constrained by measurements, we can furthermore decide how much to rely on any given theory constraint by
choosing how much to impose it as an additional constraint on the fit.
In summary, the TNP approach provides truly parametric theory uncertainties. As a
result, it correctly captures the point-by-point correlations in x by providing the necessary
breakdown of the total theory uncertainty into mutually independent uncertainty components. In essence, by requiring Eq. (2.10), the TNP parameterization must encode the
correct dependence of the missing higher order on the observable x, which is precisely what
is needed to encode the correct correlation structure. The general principles and strategies
for constructing suitable parameterizations are discussed in Ref. [34]. The relevant TNPs
for our case at hand are discussed in section 3.2.3.

3

Theory Description and Pseudodata Setup

In this section, we summarize the theoretical description of the qT spectrum which we use
for our study. After discussing the overall theory requirements in section 3.1, we discuss
the relevant perturbative contributions in section 3.2 and the nonperturbative effects in
section 3.3. In section 3.4, we discuss our Asimov fit setup.
3.1

Theory requirements

The transverse momentum (qT ) distribution of dilepton pairs from Drell–Yan production
is one of the most precisely measured observables at hadron colliders, with the latest LHC
measurements reaching subpercent precision over a broad range of qT values. This high
level of experimental precision puts high demands on the theoretical description. For a
reliable (sub)percent-level extraction of αs (mZ ) from the small-qT spectrum, not only must
the theory predictions be accurate to the (sub)percent level, but as already discussed the
theory uncertainties and correlations must also be well understood and reliably quantified.
The differential cross section in qT can be written as
dσ
dσ (0) dσnons
=
+
.
dqT
dqT
dqT

(3.1)

Here, dσ (0) denotes the leading-power contribution,
which dominates the spectrum in the
p
2
small-qT region, qT ≪ Q, where Q ≡ q ∼ mZ is the dilepton invariant mass. The

– 11 –

nonsingular term, dσnons , contains all remaining contributions, which are power-suppressed
by O(qT2 /Q2 ) and thus subdominant relative to dσ (0) .
The largest sensitivity to αs (mZ ) comes from the small-qT region. Since dσ (0) dominates here, it is also the dominant source of perturbative and nonperturbative uncertainties
and therefore the main focus of our study. At each order in αs , dσ (0) contains logarithms
lnn (qT /Q), which must be resummed to obtain precise and perturbatively stable predictions. In parallel, it is affected by nonperturbative corrections of O(ΛnQCD /qTn ), which shape
the qT spectrum at very low qT ≲ 10 GeV. Their associated uncertainties therefore play an
important role for extracting αs (mZ ). A complete treatment of perturbative uncertainties
and a proper parameterization of nonperturbative effects in the leading-power contribution
are thus indispensable for a reliable αs extraction at low qT .
Another key ingredient is the treatment of parton distribution functions (PDFs). PDFs
influence both the normalization and shape of the spectrum. They are extracted from
global fits that themselves depend on assumptions about αs . This introduces a nontrivial
correlation between the value of αs (mZ ) one extracts and the underlying PDFs used in
the prediction [35–39]. Thus, a consistent extraction must account for PDF uncertainties
and, ideally, include the interplay between PDFs and αs in a consistent fashion. A more
detailed study of PDF uncertainties in the extraction of αs (mZ ) from the Z qT spectrum
will be presented in a forthcoming paper [40].
Beyond these leading contributions, achieving a (sub)percent-level theoretical description requires incorporating various subleading effects. One such effect is the nonsingular
contribution in Eq. (3.1). Similarly, quark mass corrections scaling as m2q /qT2 , and QED
and electroweak effects become relevant at this level of precision (see e.g. Refs. [65–70]).
Neglecting these subleading effects can cause a substantial bias in the extracted value of
αs (mZ ), so it is important to include them in a fit to real data. However, once they are
included, we do not expect them to have a major influence on the uncertainty in αs (mZ ).
We can therefore consistently neglect them in our study as further discussed in section 3.4.
Summarizing, for our study we focus on the leading-power contribution, its resummed
perturbative prediction and associated uncertainty as discussed in section 3.2, and its
nonperturbative effects and associated uncertainty as discussed in section 3.3. Among the
subleading effects, the nonsingular contribution is the largest. We therefore briefly study
its impact in appendix B.1, showing that it can indeed be neglected for the purposes of
our main analysis. In appendix A.3 we also briefly comment on the potential bias from
neglecting quark masses.
3.2

Resummation of perturbative contributions at small qT

We use the SCET resummation framework including TNPs of Refs. [32, 34, 52]. In the
following, we focus on the aspects relevant to our study and refer to these references
for further details. The numerical results for our study are obtained with the help of
SCETlib [71] and its implementation of qT resummation with TNPs [25, 32, 34, 52, 72].
µ
p We denote the four-momentum of the vector boson by q , its invariant mass by Q ≡
q 2 , its total rapidity by Y , and its transverse momentum by qT = |⃗qT |. We are interested
in the leading-power cross section fully differential in Q, Y and ⃗qT , collectively denoted as

– 12 –

dσ (0) /d4 q. In our framework, its resummation is based on its factorization theorem [73–84],
which is written as
X
1
dσ (0)
=
LV V ′ (q 2 )
HV V ′ ab (q 2 , µ)
4
2
d q
2Ecm
a,b
Z 2⃗
d bT i⃗bT ·⃗qT
×
e
B̃a (xa , bT , µ, ν/Q) B̃b (xb , bT , µ, ν/Q)S̃(bT , µ, ν) .
(2π)2

(3.2)

Here, Ecm is the hadronic center-of-mass energy and LV V ′ (q 2 ) denotes the leptonic tensor
associated with the final-state vector boson V V ′ = {γγ, γZ, Zγ, ZZ}, which is not affected
by QCD corrections. The sum runs over parton flavors a, b, and the remaining ingredients
are the hard function HV V ′ ab (q 2 , µ) , the beam functions B̃a,b (xa,b , bT , µ, ν/Q), and the
soft function S̃(bT , µ, ν). The variable bT = |⃗bT | is the Fourier-conjugate of qT and xa,b =
(Q/Ecm ) exp±Y encode the dependence on the rapidity and collider energy.
3.2.1

Resummation

Each of the perturbative ingredients in Eq. (3.2) obeys a renormalization group evolution
(RGE), which determines its scale and kinematic dependence to all orders in αs . As a
result, the factorization theorem predicts the full qT dependence and, for fixed xa,b , also
the Q dependence. Although it does not predict the full functional form in xa,b , it simplifies
this dependence to the product of two one-dimensional beam functions. We now describe
each ingredient in turn.
The hard function HV V ′ ab encodes virtual corrections to the underlying hard partonic interaction process ab → V . It can be extracted as the infrared-finite part of the
corresponding form factors. Explicit expressions for HV V ′ ab and LV V ′ in terms of the underlying SCET Wilson coefficients Cq (q 2 , µ) are given in Ref. [52]. The Cq ’s RGE equation
is given by
µ

−q 2 − i0
d
ln Cq (q 2 , µ) = Γqcusp [αs (µ)] ln
+ 2γCq [αs (µ)] ,
dµ
µ2

(3.3)

where Γqcusp (αs ) and γC (αs ) are the cusp and noncusp anomalous dimensions, respectively.
The soft function captures wide-angle soft radiation. It additionally depends on the
rapidity renormalization scale ν. Its scale dependence is governed by the following RGE
system
d
µ
ln S̃(bT , µ, ν) = 4Γqcusp [αs (µ)] ln + γ̃S [αs (µ)] ,
dµ
ν
d
ν
ln S̃(bT , µ, ν) = γ̃ν (bT , µ) ,
dν
d
µ γ̃ν (bT , µ) = −4Γqcusp [αs (µ)] .
dµ

µ

(3.4)

The rapidity anomalous dimensions γ̃ν (bT , µ) encodes the nontrivial bT dependence, which
in turn is governed by its own µ RGE.

– 13 –

The beam functions B̃i (x, bT , µ, ν/Q) describe the extraction of a parton i carrying
momentum fraction x at some transverse-momentum conjugate bT from an unpolarized
hadron. They evolve according to
d
ν
ln B̃q (x, bT , µ, ν/Q) = 2Γqcusp [αs (µ)] ln + γ̃B [αs (µ)] ,
dµ
Q
d
1
ν
ln B̃q (x, bT , µ, ν/ω) = − γ̃ν (bT , µ) ,
dν
2
d
µ γ̃ν (bT , µ) = −4Γqcusp [αs (µ)] .
dµ

µ

(3.5)

While their RGE fully determines their bT and Q dependence, their dependence on x is
not predicted and only arises via the boundary condition at canonical scales µ = b0 /bT and
ν = Q, defined as
b̃i (x, αs ) ≡ B̃i (x, bT , µ = b0 /bT , ν/Q = 1) .
(3.6)
In the perturbative region qT ∼ 1/bT ≫ ΛQCD , this boundary condition is computed in
terms of standard PDFs at the canonical scale µcan
= b0 /bT ,
f
b̃i,n (x) =


x
X Z dz
,
I˜ij,n (z) fj , µcan
z
z f

(3.7)

j

where I˜ij,n (z) are perturbative matching kernels. The x dependence of the beam function
is thus given by the Mellin convolution of these kernels with the PDFs.
The resummation proceeds by evaluating each of the perturbative ingredients in Eq. (3.2)
in fixed order at their natural (canonical) µ and ν scales, where they are free of large logarithmic corrections. These are called the boundary conditions. Starting from their boundary conditions, the functions are then evolved to common overall µ and ν scales by solving
their respective RGEs. In the combination of all RGEs and upon Fourier-transforming back
to momentum space, the logarithms of qT /Q are resummed to all orders in perturbation
theory. The canonical scales in bT space are given by
can
can
can
=
µcan
= µcan
B = µS = νS = µ0
f

b0
,
bT

can
νB
= µcan
H = Q,

(3.8)

where µS,B and νS,B are the scales of the soft and beam functions, µ0 is the scale at which
the boundary condition of the rapidity anomalous dimension is evaluated, µf is the scale
at which the matching to PDFs in Eq. (3.7) is performed, and b0 = 2e−γE ≈ 1.12292 is a
conventional factor.
Since we do not include nonsingular power corrections in our main study, we do not
discuss here the procedure for switching off the resummation at large qT to recover the
fixed-order result. For that purpose, the canonical scales in Eq. (3.8) are modified using

– 14 –

hybrid profile scales [85] (see Ref. [32] for details), defined as
µH = Q ,

qT 1  b0 min 
,
,µ
µB = Q frun
, µ∗
Q Q
bT B


qT 1  b0 min 
µS = Q frun
,
,µ
, µ∗
Q Q
bT S
b

0
µ0 = µ∗
, µmin
,
0
bT


νB = Q ,



qT 1  b0 min 
νS = Q frun
,
,ν
, µ∗
Q Q
bT S


qT 1  b0 min 
,
µf = Q frun
,µ
, µ∗
Q Q
bT f

(3.9)

where the profile function frun (x, y) ensures a smooth transition between the canonical
scales in the resummation region, x = qT /Q ≪ 1, and the fixed-order region, x = qT /Q ∼ 1.
The most relevant point for our purposes is that the transition only starts at a transition
point x1 (by default x1 = 0.3) and below it frun (x ≤ x1 , y) = y, so the default scales in
Eq. (3.9) reduce to
µB,S,0,f = µ∗

b

0

bT


, µmin
B,S,0,f ,

νS = µ∗

b

0

bT


, νSmin ,

(for qT ≤ x1 Q) .

νB = µH = Q

(3.10)
Hence, in this “canonical” qT region, the default scales we use only differ from their canonical values in Eq. (3.8) by the µ∗ function, which simply enforces a smooth lower bound on
the scales to avoid the nonperturbative regime at large bT , where the QCD Landau pole
would be encountered, with
min
µmin
= µmin
= 1 GeV ,
B = µS
0

3.2.2

νSmin = 0 .

= 1.4 GeV ,
µmin
f

(3.11)

Scale variations

We now briefly summarize the scale-variation setup in SCETlib, referring to Ref. [32] for
more details. The central scale choices are equivalent to the default scales in Eqs. (3.9)
and (3.10). The scale variations are performed by varying the scales around their central
values with multiplicative factors. In the canonical region qT ≤ x1 Q, these are
µH = 2wFO Q ,
vµ

b

vµ

bT
b

B
µB = 2wFO fvary
µ∗

S
µS = 2wFO fvary
µ∗

µf = 2vµf µ∗

b

0

,

0

0

bT

,
,



vµB ,
2wFO fvary

µmin
S
vµS ,
2wFO fvary


µmin
f

bT 2vµf

µmin
B

vν

B
νB = 2wFO fvary
Q,

vν

S
νS = 2wFO fvary
µ∗

.

b

0

,

νSmin

vνS
bT 2wFO fvary



,
(3.12)

The same overall factors for each scale also appear inside its µ∗ function, which ensures that
the effective minimum scales at large bT are unaffected by the variations. The boundary
scale µ0 is held fixed, as its variation is effectively captured already by those of νB,S .
The different variation factors are used to perform different classes of variations, which we
describe in turn.

– 15 –

The resummation uncertainty ∆resum is obtained by varying the beam and soft
scales via vµB , vνB , vµS , vνS by taking vi = {−1, 0, +1} with vi = 0 corresponding to the
central scale. Here, fvary ≡ fvary (qT /Q) is a function of qT /Q that approaches 2 for qT → 0
and 1 for qT /Q → 1, i.e., it smoothly turns off the variation outside the resummation
region. We perform 36 variations of suitable combinations of the vi and then take their
maximum envelope as the resulting final uncertainty ∆resum .
For the fixed-order uncertainty ∆FO , we simultaneously vary the scales of the
hard, beam, and soft functions by an overall factor of 2 by taking wFO = {−1, 0, +1}. The
final uncertainty is again taken as the maximum envelope of these two variations. This
variation only probes the fixed-order boundary conditions without changing the resummed
logarithms, hence its name.
The uncertainty related to the DGLAP running of the PDFs ∆f is obtained by
varying the PDF scale µf by taking vµf = {−1, 0, +1} and taking the maximum envelope
of the two variations.
Finally, the matching uncertainty ∆match is given by the maximum envelope of
the variations of the transition points xi inside the frun function determining the transition
from the canonical to the fixed-order region. There are three points (x1 , x2 , x3 ) determining
the start, midpoint, and endpoint of the transition. Their central values are (0.3, 0.6, 0.9)
and their variations are
(x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∈ {(0.4, 0.75, 1.1), (0.2, 0.45, 0.7), (0.4, 0.55, 0.7), (0.2, 0.65, 1.1)} .

(3.13)

These different classes of variations are specifically chosen to probe separate aspects of
the perturbative series. They are then considered as independent uncertainties and added
in quadrature to obtain the total perturbative uncertainty,
q
∆pert = ∆2FO + ∆2f + ∆2match + ∆2resum .
(3.14)
In particular, the µf variation is not enveloped with the other scale variations, but is
instead treated as a separate component. The reason is that it probes the uncertainty
due to DGLAP running, which can be considered as a separate source of perturbative
uncertainty.
3.2.3

TNPs for qT resummation

We now briefly summarize the theory nuisance parameters for qT resummation, referring
to section 6 of Ref. [34] for more details. The leading-power spectrum in Eq. (3.2) is fully
determined by the hard, beam and soft functions, F = {H, B, S}. Each of these function
satisfies a coupled system of RGEs, given in Eq. (3.3), Eq. (3.4) and Eq. (3.5). Their
solution can be written schematically as
Z L

h
 ′
i
can
can
′
′
′
dL Γcusp αs (L ) L + γF αs (L )
F (αs , L) = F (αs ) exp
,
(3.15)
0
can ≡ α (µcan ). It depends on the boundary condition F (α )
where L ≡ ln(µ/µcan
s F
s
F ) and αs
(defined at strictly canonical scale for L = 0) as well as the cusp and noncusp anomalous

– 16 –

dimensions, Γcusp (αs ) and γF (αs ). These perturbative series contain the complete perturbative information necessary for the leading-power spectrum. We can therefore treat
each of them following the TNP approach of Ref. [34] and as outlined in section 2.3, parameterizing their individual missing higher-order coefficients with TNPs. Since the qT
dependence is completely predicted by the factorization theorem in terms of these, this
treatment correctly encodes the point-by-point correlations in qT .
Denoting generically all boundary conditions as F (αs ) and all anomalous dimensions
as γ(αs ), we write
X  αs n
,
F (αs ) = 1 +
Fn
4π
n=1
X  αs n+1
γn
γ(αs ) =
,
(3.16)
4π
n=0

and parametrize each coefficient (for fixed nf = 5) as
Fn (θnF ) = 4n Cn (n − 1)! θnF ,

(3.17)

γn (θnγ )

(3.18)

=

Cn+1 4n+1 θnγ .

Here, Cn is the relevant leading n-loop coefficient, which in our case is given by Cn =
n−1
, and θnF , θnγ are the TNPs.
CF CA
The generalized order counting for resummation including TNPs is denoted as Nm+k LL
and defined in analogy to Nm+k LO in section 2.3 as follows: A given perturbative resummation order, Nn LL, is uniquely and well defined by including all underlying perturbative
series in the RGE to a certain order in αs , namely the boundary conditions to (n − 1)
loops, the noncusp anomalous dimensions to n loops, and the cusp anomalous dimensions
and QCD beta functions to n + 1 loops. At Nm+k LL we use the complete resummation
structure at Nn LL with n = m + k with the true values for all coefficients relevant up to
Nm LL and the TNP parameterization for the last k coefficients of each series. For example,
Eq. (3.15) at N3+1 LL takes the form
N

3+1

LL:

F (αscan , L)


Z L

2
 αcan k
 αcan 3 
X
s
s
F
′
= 1+
F̂k
+ F3 (θ3 )
exp
dL
4π
4π
0
k=1
3
X h

h α (L′ ) i5
αs (L′ ) ik+1 ′
s
L + Γ4 (θ4Γ )
L′
4π
4π
k=0
2
h α (L′ ) ik+1
h α (L′ ) i4 
X
s
s
γF
+
γ̂F,k
+ γF,3 (θ3 )
.
4π
4π
Γ̂k

(3.19)

k=0

Furthermore, in the full resummed cross section, the product of all boundary conditions
is expanded in αs including cross terms up to O(αs3 ) as relevant for N4 LL. Note that
despite the fact that the highest k coefficients at Nm+k LL are treated as unknown, due to
having the complete (m + k)th-order structure, this order still contains more perturbative
information than Nm LL, so the perturbative accuracy at Nm+k LL is generically higher
than at Nm LL.

– 17 –

For our analysis of the Drell-Yan qT spectrum, we consider a minimal set of seven
independent TNPs,
θnγ : γ ∈ {Γ, γµ , γν } ,

θnF : F ∈ {H, S, Bqq , Bqg } ,

(3.20)

associated with the following independent perturbative series and thus sources of uncertainty: The cusp anomalous dimension (Γcusp ), the noncusp anomalous dimensions (γµ ,
γν ), and the boundary conditions of the hard (H), soft (S) and beam (Bqq , Bqg ) functions.
Their detailed normalization conventions are discussed in Ref. [34]. For the beam functions
in particular, based on Eq. (3.7), we adopt the parameterization
3 B
B
I˜ij,n (z, θn ij ) = θn ij Iˆ˜ij,n (z) ,
2

(3.21)

which uses their known z dependence multiplied by an overall prefactor of 3/2 to be
conservative. With this parameterization we effectively treat their shape as known and
their overall normalization as unknown. This choice is a compromise. It means while we
do not yet account for the uncertainty associated with their shape, we have the correct
correlations in z and thereby in Y for the dominant overall normalization uncertainty we do
consider. Since the dominant partonic channels for Z boson production are ij = {qq, qg},
we introduce only two TNPs for the beam boundary conditions. For simplicity, singlet
contributions that appear at higher orders and only have a very minor impact are not
B
considered separately. Specifically, we use a single effective TNP, θn qq , which varies all qq
channels together,
B

B

B

B

B

θn qq ≡ θn qqV ≡ θn qq̄V ≡ θn qqS ≡ θn qq∆S ,

(3.22)

B

and a separate TNP, θn qg , for the qg channel.
As explained in section 2.3 and following Ref. [34], each nuisance parameter θn is
modelled as a Gaussian-distributed random variable which by default has zero mean,
θn = 0 ± ∆θn ,

(3.23)

with ∆θn setting the width of the distribution and hence the size of the variation. Unless
otherwise stated, we take ∆θn = 1 as our default theory constraint, corresponding to a 68%
theory confidence level. We also explore the impact of relaxing the theory constraint in
section 4.2.4. The default (pre-fit) result at Nm+k LL is then given by the default resummed
result as discussed in section 3.2.1 with all TNPs that enter it set to zero. Its uncertainty
is obtained by varying each TNP by ∆θn and adding all variations in quadrature (since by
default all TNPs are considered independent). After fitting the TNPs to data, the post-fit
result for the resummed spectrum is then given by using the post-fit central values and
uncertainties of all TNPs.
Finally, it is important to note that the above minimal set of TNPs does not yet capture
all potential sources of uncertainties. As discussed in Ref. [34], additional sources are the
full set of partonic channels in the beam functions as well as their functional dependence,
the DGLAP splitting functions, singlet contributions to the hard function, and the QCD

– 18 –

β function. These are currently not accounted for and are left for future improvements.
Among these, the latter two are likely to be irrelevant while the uncertainties associated
with the DGLAP splitting functions may prove to be the most relevant.
3.3

Nonperturbative effects

The qT spectrum is affected by nonperturbative effects that scale as Λ2QCD /qT2 , and which
are expected to become relevant at the few-percent level for qT ≲ 10 GeV [32]. In the
literature a variety of phenomenological models have been used to incorporate nonperturbative effects, typically involving a small number of free parameters fitted to data. Since
this region of moderately small qT is also where the dominant sensitivity to αs (mZ ) comes
from, we require a correct parameterization of nonperturbative effects to ensure a reliable theoretical description in this region with correct point-by-point correlations of the
nonperturbative uncertainties.
In this section, we briefly discuss the nonperturbative approach used in SCETlib [32],
which is based on performing a systematic OPE expansion of nonperturbative effects. Next,
we discuss the specific nonperturbative parameterization we employ for our study here.
3.3.1

General discussion

The nonperturbative effects enter via the beam and soft functions appearing in Eq. (3.2).
To discuss their nonperturbative contributions, it is convenient to combine their product in
bT space into conventional transverse-momentum dependent PDFs (TMD PDFs), defined
as
p q
(3.24)
f˜i (x, bT , µ, ζ) = B̃i (x, bT , µ, ν/ ζ) S̃(bT , µ, ν) .
Here, ζ is the so-called Collin-Soper scale, which now takes over the role of the rapidity
scale ν, whose dependence cancels on the right-hand side. Similarly, the combined rapidity
RGE of the beam and soft functions gets replaced by the ζ evolution of the TMD PDF,
h1
ζi
.
f˜i (x, bT , µ, ζ) = f˜i (x, bT , µ, ζ0 ) exp γ̃ζ (bT , µ) ln
2
ζ0

(3.25)

The physical value of the final scale ζ in the resummed cross section is ζ = Q2 , as seen in
√
Eq. (3.2). The boundary scale ζ0 is equivalent to νS2 and its canonical value is ζ0 = b0 /bT ,
which eliminates the potentially large rapidity logarithms ln(ζ0 b2T /b20 ) in the TMD PDF’s
boundary condition. The associated anomalous dimension is known as the Collins-Soper
(CS) kernel, γ̃ζ (bT , µ), which is simply related to the rapidity anomalous dimension,
1
γ̃ζ (bT , µ) = γ̃ν (bT , µ) .
2

(3.26)

There are in total two distinct sources of nonperturbative contributions, namely to the
TMD PDF boundary condition and the CS kernel, which can be written as [86],
γ̃ζ (bT , µ) = γ̃ζpert (b∗ (bT ), µ) + γ̃ζnp (bT ) ,
f˜i (x, bT , µ, ζ0 ) = f˜ipert (x, bT , µ, ζ0 )f˜inp (x, bT , ζ0 ) .

– 19 –

(3.27)

Here, the quantities on the left-hand side are defined in full QCD. The separation into
perturbative and nonperturbative parts on the right-hand side is well defined, but a priori
not unique. Namely, the exact definition of the nonperturbative pieces, f˜np and γ̃ζnp , is
implicitly determined by the exact definition of the perturbative pieces, f˜pert and γ̃ζpert ,
including all choices of boundary scales and cutoff prescriptions used to avoid the Landau
pole, as discussed below.
The nonperturbative contribution to the CS kernel, γ̃ζnp (bT ), is universal, like the CS
kernel (or rapidity anomalous dimension) itself, in that it only depends on whether the
considered process is quark or gluon initiated (which for simplicity is suppressed in our
notation). In particular, it is universal across processes such as Drell-Yan production
(including Z and W bosons) and semi-inclusive deep inelastic scattering. It can also be
accessed via lattice QCD calculations [87–92]. In principle, this allows one to obtain information on γ̃ζnp (bT ) by comparing to the lattice results, for which a proper treatment of
massive quark corrections is however essential [66].
Unlike the CS kernel, the nonperturbative TMD PDF boundary condition, f˜inp (x, bT ),
is not universal to all quarks. Like the TMD PDF itself, in addition to bT it also depends
on the flavor i and Bjorken x of the interacting parton. It can be thought of as describing
the intrinsic transverse momentum of the partons inside the proton.
At large bT ∼ 1/ΛQCD , f˜inp (x, bT ) and γ̃ζnp (bT ) are genuine nonperturbative functions of
bT . However, the relevant region of interest for our purposes is the spectrum for qT ≳ 1 GeV,
which is determined by much smaller bT , namely where 1/bT ∼ qT ≫ ΛQCD is still in the
perturbative domain. In this region, nonperturbative effects are not negligible, but we
can systematically expand them in an operator product expansion (OPE) in powers of
ΛQCD bT ≪ 1 [75, 76, 93–97] (see also Ref. [98]). The OPE of the final TMD PDF entering
the factorized cross section takes the form [97]


h
bT Q i
(0)
f˜i (x, bT , µ, Q) = f˜i (x, bT , µ, Q) 1 + b2T Λ2,i (x) + λζ2 ln
+ O(Λ4QCD b4T ) , (3.28)
b0
(0)
where the leading term f˜i corresponds to the (resummed) purely perturbative result at
canonical boundary scales, and the higher-order terms arise from expanding the nonperturbative contributions to the CS kernel and TMD PDF boundary condition (at canonical
ζ0 = b20 /b2T ),

γ̃ζnp (bT ) = λζ2 b2T + O(Λ4QCD b4T ) ,
f˜inp (x, bT ) = 1 + Λ2,i (x) b2T + O(Λ4QCD b4T ) .

(3.29)

Here, λζ2 is a single number related to a gluon vacuum condensate [96], while Λ2,i (x) is in
principle still a function of x and i. For the qT spectrum, λζ2 is the parametrically leading
nonperturbative effect since in Eq. (3.28) it is enhanced by the large logarithm ln(bT Q).
3.3.2

Nonperturbative parameterization

In our case, the perturbative contributions, f˜pert and γ̃ζpert in Eq. (3.27) are given by the
default resummed results discussed in section 3.2. In addition, the explicit bT dependence

– 20 –

of the perturbative CS kernel is evaluated at b∗ (bT ), as indicated in Eq. (3.27), to regulate
the nonperturbative large-bT behaviour. Specifically, we use

 1
b6T − 6
,
b (bT ) = bT 1 + 6
bmax
∗

(3.30)

which smoothly interpolates between the perturbative small-bT region and the nonperturbative large-bT region, where b0 /bmax = 1 GeV acts as an upper cutoff. That is,
b∗ (bT ≪ bmax ) = bT while b∗ (bT ≫ bmax ) = bmax with a smooth transition in between.
The advantage of using a higher power than the usual quadratic b∗ prescription is that
in this way, the perturbative result differs from the strictly canonical one only starting at
O(b6T ), which means it does not alter the OPE below O(b6T ) [97].
To include the nonperturbative contributions, we have to choose a nonperturbative
model. We require the model to reproduce the correct OPE in Eq. (3.29) for bT → 0. The
OPE does not constrain the behaviour for bT → ∞. While as mentioned before the precise
functional form at large bT is of limited relevance, to have some guidance we require the
model to obey the asymptotic limits suggested in Ref. [94],
γ̃ζnp (bT → ∞) → −const ,
ln f˜np (x, bT → ∞) → −const × bT .
A convenient choice satisfying the requirements in both limits is as follows,


λ2 2
λ4 4
np
np
2γ̃ζ (bT ) = γ̃ν (bT ) = −λ∞ tanh
b +
b
λ∞ T λ∞ T
(
1/bT ≫ ΛQCD
−λ2 b2T − λ4 b4T + O(b6T )
=
−λ∞
1/bT ≪ ΛQCD ,



Λ2
Λ4 2
1 Λ32 3
np
˜
ln f (x, bT ) = −bT Λ∞ tanh
+
b bT +
b
Λ∞ Λ∞ T
3 Λ3∞ T
(
1/bT ≫ ΛQCD
−Λ2 b2T − Λ4 b4T + O(b6T )
=
−Λ∞ bT
1/bT ≪ ΛQCD ,

(3.31)

(3.32)

(3.33)

where we exploited that tanh(x → 0) → x and tanh(x → ∞) → 1. Each model depends on
three parameters: λ2,4 and Λ2,4 determine the quadratic and quartic terms in the expansion
around bT = 0 and are in one-to-one correspondence with the quadratic and quartic OPE
coefficients. The parameters λ∞ and Λ∞ set the asymptotic behaviour for bT → ∞.
We note that the above model for the TMD PDF does not yet include flavor or x
dependence, which would be required for a more complete treatment. As we explain in
section 3.4, this simplified setup is sufficient for Asimov fits since we can use the same
model in both pseudodata and fitted theory model. However, it is likely not sufficient for a
fit to real data, which in general requires flavor and x dependence [31, 99, 100]. As shown
in Ref. [32], the full flavor and x dependence of the nonperturbative TMD model can be
approximated by an effective flavor-averaged model that only depends on the rapidity Y
and a given resonant boson type and center-of-mass energy. However, this also implies that

– 21 –

once several different rapidity bins are considered, the effective TMD parameters must at
least depend on rapidity. The fits to the qT spectrum performed in Ref. [62] found indeed
evidence for the presence of a nontrivial effective rapidity dependence of Λ2 .
For the purpose of our Asimov fits, we also need some representative values for the
nonperturbative parameters to be used as true values in our Asimov pseudodata. As
already mentioned above, the nonperturbative CS kernel can be constrained by lattice
QCD data [89–91]. This requires properly accounting for quark flavor thresholds and quark
mass effects as will be discussed in Ref. [66]. Using Ref. [66] to fit our nonperturbative
parameterization of the CS kernel to the lattice QCD data, we obtain the following results,
λ∞ = 1.6853 ± 0.5069 ,
λ2 = (0.0870 ± 0.0332) GeV2 ,
λ4 = (0.0074 ± 0.0066) GeV4 ,
with the resulting correlation matrix


1

0.5212 −0.7249

(3.34)





C=
1
−0.9135
 0.5212
.
−0.7249 −0.9135
1

(3.35)

We will use these as representative values for the CS kernel parameters of our model.
For the TMD parameters, due to a lack of robust constraints, we choose a generic size of
(0.5 GeV)n as representative central values. Specifically, we take
Λ2 = 0.25 GeV2 ,

Λ4 = 0.06 GeV4 ,

Λ∞ = 1 GeV .

(3.36)

We have checked that the results of our Asimov fits do not depend on the precise central
values chosen.
3.4

Asimov fit setup

In this section, we outline the methodology and rationale behind the use of Asimov fits,
and provide all relevant details of our setup used to study the uncertainties in extracting
αs (mZ ) from the Drell-Yan qT spectrum.
3.4.1

General discussion

To estimate the expected uncertainties in the extraction of αs (mZ ) – or any other theory
parameter of interest – it is common practice to perform Asimov fits. These fits serve as
controlled tests of the fitting framework and allow a transparent study of the sensitivity to
different theory ingredients.3
The fits we perform use a standard χ2 minimization procedure, defined as
χ2 =

X
X (θi − 0)2
−1
(yi − λi )T Cij
(yj − λj ) +
,
∆θi2
i,j
i

3

(3.37)

The rationale behind the Asimov fits in this setup is in many ways similar to the closure tests performed
in other contexts where pseudodata are used to test the quantification of uncertainties.

– 22 –

where yi represent the data, λi the corresponding theory model, and Cij the covariance
matrix encoding all experimental uncertainties and correlations between the data points.
The λi implicitly depend upon αs (mZ ) and the parameters of the underlying theory prediction, i.e. the TNPs and nonperturbative parameters discussed in sections 3.2.3 and 3.3.
Within the fit, αs (mZ ), the TNPs, and nonperturbative parameters are treated as continuous parameters. The last term imposes the Gaussian theory constraint on the TNPs, θi ,
about their central values of 0 with a prior uncertainty of ∆θi , as discussed in section 3.2.3.
What distinguishes an Asimov fit is that the data are replaced by pseudodata – i.e.,
the (unfluctuated) theory predictions computed at a fixed known value of the parameter
of interest, in our case αs (mZ ) = 0.118. The covariance matrix remains that of the actual
experimental measurement, ensuring that the uncertainties remain realistic. By replacing
experimental data with theory-generated pseudodata, this setup offers multiple advantages:
• The results are unobscured by statistical fluctuations or potential outlier behaviour
present in the real data.
• It avoids potential inconsistencies or biases due to subleading effects present in the
real data but unaccounted for in the theory model.
• The impact of various theory components or uncertainties can be tested and estimated
in isolation. In particular, subleading effects can be consistently dropped in both
pseudodata and theory model.
• Since the theory model and pseudodata are matched (except for intentional differences
in some tests), the minimum χ2 should be close to zero, providing a clean validation
test for the fitting procedure.
As discussed in section 3.1, we focus on the dominant sources of theory uncertainty,
namely the perturbative resummation and nonperturbative modelling of the dominant
leading-power contribution to the small-qT spectrum. Subleading effects such as nonsingular power corrections, finite quark-mass effects, and QCD+electroweak corrections are
known to impact the shape of the qT spectrum at the few-percent level but can be neglected in our Asimov fits as long as we consistently neglect them in both the theory model
and pseudodata. Indeed, being subleading effects, their associated uncertainty will also be
subdominant with respect to the dominant sources of uncertainties.
One might worry that even subleading contributions, by altering the shape of the
spectrum, could subtly affect the estimate of the dominant uncertainties. Among these, the
nonsingular terms are the most relevant, as they contribute up to O(5%) of the spectrum
for qT ≲ 30 GeV [52]. For this reason, in appendix B.1, we explicitly verify that including
nonsingular terms up to O(αs2 ) has a negligible effect on the estimated uncertainty for
αs (mZ ).
Nevertheless, we emphasize that in fits to real data, these subleading effects must of
course be included in the fitted theory model, as they are present in the real data. While
they may not substantially affect our estimate of the dominant uncertainties, they can
significantly bias the central value of αs (mZ ) and degrade the fit quality if not properly
accounted for.

– 23 –

3.4.2

Fit setup

We perform our study using pseudodata based on the inclusive Z-boson qT spectrum at
Ecm = 8 TeV in the dilepton mass window 80 GeV ≤ Q ≤ 100 GeV as measured by
ATLAS in Ref. [19]. Specifically, we include the first nine qT bins covering the region
qT ∈ [0, 29] GeV, for each of eight bins in rapidity Y ∈ [0, 3.6], yielding 72 data points
in total. We use the full experimental covariance matrix, incorporating all bin-to-bin
correlations, as provided by ATLAS. On top of this, we include a fully correlated 1.8%
luminosity uncertainty. These are the data also used in Ref. [33].
For our theory predictions, both for pseudodata and for the fitted theory model, we
employ the SCETlib framework as discussed in sections 3.2 and 3.3. All pseudodata are
generated at a fixed value of αs (mZ ) = 0.118, and thus all fits must give a similar value
for the fitted αs (mZ ). When using scale variations, we use the resummation at N4 LL and
follow the variation scheme defined in SCETlib [32] as described in section 3.2.2.
When using the TNP approach, we use the SCETlib implementation of Ref. [34]
as described in section 3.2.3. Our nominal theory model is given by N3+1 LL while for
the pseudodata we use either the default N3+1 LL result with zero as true values for all
TNPs or alternatively N4 LL, which is equivalent to N3+1 LL with all TNPs set to their true
values. As we will see, the advantage of using N3+1 LL is that the perturbative precision
is sufficiently high compared to the experimental precision to obtain nontrivial results. At
the same time the true values of all TNPs are still known, which allows us to perform more
nontrivial tests by fitting to N4 LL, simulating a fit to real data.
For the nonperturbative modelling, we always use the same nonperturbative model for
both the theory model and pseudodata, and whenever the nonperturbative parameters are
fixed they are set to their central values given in section 3.3.
Regarding the PDF dependence, we always use the MSHT20aN3LO PDF set [59], and
account for the interplay between αs (mZ ) and the PDFs in the qT spectrum. Since αs and
the PDFs are strongly correlated, we ensure that the PDF set entering the prediction is
consistent with the value of αs (mZ ) being tested. For this purpose, we perform a linear
interpolation between the available PDF sets for αs (mZ ) = 0.118 and αs (mZ ) = 0.117
when αs (mZ ) < 0.118 and between the PDF sets for αs (mZ ) = 0.118 and αs (mZ ) = 0.119
when αs (mZ ) > 0.118. This interpolation is only used for the PDFs, while the dependence
on αs (mZ ) in the perturbative prediction itself is always treated exactly.
For minimization, we use the standard Minuit fitting tool [101–103].

4

Perturbative Uncertainties

In this section, we present our results obtained using both scale variation and TNP-based
approaches to estimate the expected perturbative uncertainty in the extraction of αs (mZ )
from the Z qT spectrum. We describe and highlight two distinct methods that can be
applied with TNPs: scanning and profiling. Subsequently, we explore the profiling of
TNPs in more detail by performing fits against higher-order pseudodata and by modifying
the prior theory constraint ∆θn on the TNPs.

– 24 –

4

N4LL profile scale var.
µFO
µf
matching
resummation
αs = 0.119

2
1

0.120

0
−1

αs = 0.117

−2
−4
0

MSHTaN3LO, 80 < mll < 100 GeV, |Y | < 1.6

5

10

15

qT [GeV]

MSHTaN3LO, 8 TeV ATLAS bins and unc.

0.118

0.117

pp → Z (8 TeV), SCETlib

−3

Z qT Asimov, SCETlib N4LL profile scale var.

0.119

αs(mZ )

rel. difference [%]

3

20

25

0.116

30

0

µFO
µf
5

matching
resummation
10

15

exp. uncertainty

20

χ2/ndof ≥ 1.5
25

30

35

40

45

Nvar

Figure 2. Left panel: Relative differences in the qT spectrum of individual scale variations at
N4 LL. Different colored lines show different classes of variations as defined in section 3.2.2. The red
dashed lines show the relative difference from varying αs (mZ ) for comparison. Right panel: The
resulting αs (mZ ) values when performing the Asimov fit to the central N4 LL prediction for each
scale variation. Different colors correspond to the same classes of variations as on the left. The
grey band shows the fit uncertainty for comparison.

4.1

Scale variations

To estimate the uncertainty due to missing higher-order corrections — referred to as the
perturbative uncertainty — it is common practice to consider scale variations. A key argument for this procedure is that the envelope of various scale variations can provide a
measure of the overall perturbative uncertainty in the spectrum. By taking the envelope,
one can mitigate the arbitrariness in choosing the specific number and type of scale variations to be considered. As a result, it is a widely-used method for estimating perturbative
uncertainties in differential spectra, which may often provide a reasonable estimate of the
approximate size of uncertainties. The resulting uncertainty band then has limited sensitivity to the individual scale variation shapes. This is sufficient for the uncertainties at
the level of the qT spectrum where we only require the rough size of the uncertainty band
but not the detailed correlations within it. The inadequacy of scale variations manifests
itself when interpreting the spectrum, i.e., when the perturbative uncertainty needs to be
propagated from the spectrum to the parameter of interest, in our case αs (mZ ).
One may ask why is it not sufficient to propagate each scale variation to a fit of αs (mZ )
and then take the envelope at the level of the extracted αs (mZ ) value? Any specific
scale choice would then correspond to a fully correlated or anti-correlated assumption,
as explained in section 2.2. In taking the envelope of scale variations at the level of
the qT spectrum we explicitly acknowledge that their individual shapes are not physical,
and assume complete ignorance regarding the correlations between different bins in the
spectrum. However, the propagation of the uncertainty from the qT spectrum to αs (mZ )
is crucially sensitive to the precise point-by-point correlations and the individual theory
shapes. Accordingly, any uncertainty resulting from such a scale-variation scanning and
enveloping procedure for αs (mZ ) should not be considered as a trustworthy or meaningful
uncertainty but merely as an indication of the possible impact of missing higher-order

– 25 –

corrections, i.e., as a means to investigate the possible theory sensitivity (which could still
very well be over- or underestimated).
Despite these known limitations of the scale variation approach, it is still interesting
in this context to use our pseudodata setup to see what happens if scale variations are
utilised. For our purposes they will serve to demonstrate that correlations and the precise
shape of the theory uncertainties are indeed critical for the extraction of αs (mZ ).
In the left panel of figure 2, we show the breakdown of all scale variations for the qT
spectrum at N4 LL from SCETlib as discussed in section 3.2.1. Overlaid on these variations
are the central predictions for αs (mZ ) = 0.117 and αs (mZ ) = 0.119, illustrating that the
sensitivity to αs (mZ ) in the qT spectrum is primarily a shape effect. To illustrate the scalevariation scanning in practice, we use the Asimov fit setup described in section 3.4. Our
pseudodata corresponds to the N4 LL central scale prediction at αs (mZ ) = 0.118. We then
repeat the fit of αs (mZ ) for each scale variation, each representing a different theory model.
The right panel of figure 2 shows the results, where each point represents the fitted value
of αs (mZ ) for one of the scale variations on the left. Points marked with a cross indicate
cases where χ2 /ndof ≥ 1.5, signifying a very poor fit to the pseudodata. The fitted αs (mZ )
values strongly depend on the choice of scale variation. While some variations have almost
no impact on αs (mZ ), yielding values very close to the nominal value of 0.118, others yield
very different values. This demonstrates that as anticipated the impact on αs (mZ ) strongly
depends on the precise shape of any given variation. As a result, the precise choice of scale
variations directly dictates the size of the would-be perturbative uncertainty, making this
approach unsuitable for a reliable uncertainty estimate.
Nevertheless, for reference we can obtain a scale-variation based estimate of the perturbative uncertainty in αs (mZ ) by considering different options to envelope the fitted results.
The envelopes of each different class of scale variations described in section 3.2.2 yield
∆FO = 1.55 × 10−3 ,
∆resum = 1.73 × 10−3 ,

∆f

= 0.71 × 10−3 ,

∆match = 0.06 × 10−3 .

(4.1)

We can then either sum these in quadrature or take the naive total envelope, obtaining
q
sum of envelopes:
∆pert = ∆2FO + ∆2f + ∆2resum + ∆2match = 2.43 × 10−3 ,
total envelope:

∆pert = 1.73 × 10−3 .

(4.2)

Regardless of the approach, we find that the perturbative uncertainty estimated via scale
variations at the currently highest known order, N4 LL, is large – much larger than our
desired level of precision for αs (mZ )
4.2

Theory nuisance parameters

As explained in section 2, to properly account for the point-by-point correlations across
the qT spectrum, the uncertainty must be decomposed into well-defined components corresponding to the underlying sources of uncertainty. The TNP approach has been developed
to do just that. In this section, we explore different methods using TNPs to estimate the

– 26 –

4

SCETlib N3+1LL pre-fit

Z qT Asimov

exp. uncertainty

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

MSHTaN3LO, 80 < mll < 100 GeV, |Y | < 1.6

3

rel. difference [%]

N3+1LL pre-fit

pp → Z (8 TeV)
Γcusp

2

γµ

1

γν
H

total

S
Bqq

Bqg
Bqq

Bqg

S
H
γν

0
−1
0

γµ
Γcusp
5

10

15

20

25

qT [GeV]

30

0.116

0.117

0.118

0.119

0.120

αs(mZ )

Figure 3. Left panel: Relative uncertainties in the qT spectrum with TNPs at N3+1 LL. The
different lines show the impact of varying the corresponding TNP by +1 or −1, corresponding to
68% theory CL. The yellow band shows their sum in quadrature. Right panel: Corresponding
uncertainty on αs (mZ ) from performing the Asimov fit to the central N3+1 LL prediction for each
TNP variation. The grey band shows the fit uncertainty for comparison.

perturbative uncertainty in the extraction of αs (mZ ). Our setup is as described in section 3.4, with the default theory model at N3+1 LL and the Asimov pseudodata at N3+1 LL
and later also at N4 LL.
4.2.1

Scanning

The first method we consider is scanning, which follows an analogous procedure to the one
used for scale variations. However, the crucial difference is that we have now decomposed
the uncertainty into its distinct sources, parameterized in terms of well-defined theory
nuisance parameters, which correctly capture and propagate the bin-by-bin correlations in
the qT spectrum.
The left panel of figure 3 presents the breakdown of the individual TNP variations
for the qT spectrum at N3+1 LL accuracy. Each TNP is varied by ∆θn = 1. Since the
resulting variations in the spectrum are nearly symmetric, for clarity, we display only
the up variations for the anomalous dimensions, hard, and soft functions, and the down
variations for the beam functions. Each TNP corresponds to an independent source of
uncertainty and is thus varied independently, capturing the correct correlations across the
qT spectrum. We can now sum in quadrature the seven independent TNP variations to
obtain the total uncertainty band, depicted in yellow.
To perform the scanning, we use the central N3+1 LL prediction as Asimov data and
repeat the fit for N3+1 LL theory models with each TNP varied separately up and down
by ∆θn = 1. The right panel of figure 3 shows the results, where the error bars represent
the difference between the fitted αs (mZ ) and the nominal expected value of 0.118, i.e., the
uncertainty on the fitted αs (mZ ) due to a given TNP. As for the spectrum, we can now
sum the individual uncertainties in quadrature to obtain the total uncertainty on αs (mZ ),

– 27 –

which yields
∆pert = 1.75 × 10−3 .

(4.3)

Although this estimate accounts for the correct theory correlations in the qT spectrum, it
does not reach our desired precision on αs (mZ ).
The scanning approach however does not fully exploit the high precision available in
the data, which could in principle impose strict constraints on the parameters of the theory
model. As each parameter is separately varied but otherwise held fixed in the fit, the fit
must compensate the resulting change in the theory model as best it can solely into a
change of αs (mZ ). However there is no feedback whether a given variation of the theory
model is actually favored or disfavored by the data. This is a key limitation of the scanning
approach. Furthermore, since we explore the parameter space separately in each direction
rather than all together, the global minimum of the multi-dimensional parameter space is
not explored, which means the quality of the minimum and the precision obtained can be
suboptimal.
Rather than relying on scanning – and its inherent limitations – we would like to be
able to fully explore the parameter space and allow the fit to select the regions where the
theory model best matches the data while avoiding regions that are inconsistent with it.
This challenge can be effectively addressed by profiling the TNPs in the fit as we discuss
next.
4.2.2

Profiling

A more advanced approach to estimate systematic uncertainties is by profiling them. In
this approach, the nuisance parameters associated with the systematic uncertainties are
simultaneously fitted along with the parameters of interest, rather than scanning them
one-by-one. In this way the full parameter space is explored, avoiding the limitations of the
scanning approach and enabling the data to constrain variations within these uncertainties
to agree with the measurements. This therefore enables a reduction in the size of the
associated uncertainties for the parameters of interest. This is a standard approach used
for experimental systematic uncertainties (see e.g. Refs. [104, 105]) as well as for PDF
uncertainties [106–108], though several caveats must be considered in general. In particular,
one must be careful in the application to PDF uncertainties – we leave this discussion to a
future dedicated paper [40].
We now apply this approach to the nuisance parameters encoding the perturbative
uncertainties, i.e. the TNPs, by fitting them together with αs (mZ ). This allows the fit
to find the optimal balance between adjusting one or more TNPs, and consequently the
theory model, or adjusting αs (mZ ) to find the best description of the data. We stress that
(in contrast to scale variations) fitting the TNPs is theoretically consistent and allowed
because the TNPs are proper parameters, which encode the correct theory correlations.
As a result, this method enables constraining the TNPs by the experimental data, thereby
(potentially) reducing the theory uncertainties. The allowed range of variation for the
TNPs is also constrained by the prior theory constraint, as explained in sections 3.2.3 and
3.4, for which we use ∆θn = 1 by default.

– 28 –

∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
N

4

pp → Z (8 TeV)

SCETlib N3+1LL post-fit
rel. difference [%]

Γcusp

H
S
Bqq

γµ

2

γν

LL
post-fit ∆αs

0.3

Z qT Asimov

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 1

MSHTaN3LO, 80 < mll < 100 GeV, |Y | < 1.6

3

3+1

Bqg

Bqg

Bqq

total
total pre-fit

S
H

1

γν

0

γµ
Γcusp

−1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0

0.5

post fit constraint

qT [GeV]

1.0

1.5

Figure 4. Left panel: Relative uncertainties in the qT spectrum at N3+1 LL before and after profiling
the TNPs. The different lines show the post-fit relative impact of each TNP and the orange band
the total post-fit uncertainty. The yellow band shows the pre-fit uncertainty corresponding to the
yellow band in figure 3. Right panel: Post-fit constraints on the TNPs (error bars) and their
impact on αs (mZ ), with the solid (dashed) grey band showing the impact of the post-fit downward
(upward) TNP variations.

To start, we perform an Asimov fit with both pseudodata and theory model given by
the N3+1 LL prediction. The resulting perturbative uncertainty on αs (mZ ) is4
∆pert = 0.45 × 10−3 .

(4.4)

The left panel of figure 4 presents the post-fit prediction for the qT spectrum with a
breakdown of the post-fit uncertainties, showing the upward variation for each TNP, except
for the beam functions which display the downward variation. As a general comment, which
applies to this and all analogous plots in the following, note that the individual TNP postfit variations do not necessarily have to lie within the total post-fit uncertainty, as there are
now nontrivial correlations between the TNPs imposed by the data. In particular, if two
TNPs are negatively correlated, their combined uncertainty on the spectrum and αs (mZ )
can be smaller than their individual impacts.
After profiling the TNPs, the uncertainties for both αs (mZ ) and the qT spectrum
are significantly smaller compared to simply scanning the TNPs and the corresponding
pre-fit uncertainties. However, focusing solely on the final uncertainty after profiling can
also be misleading and may lead to incorrect conclusions. An important aspect when
profiling systematic uncertainties is to examine to what extent the data actually pulls
and constraints the nuisance parameters in order to ensure that the constrained post-fit
theory model is still adequate and allowed. In our case, we have to ensure that the theory
4
This value is the total fit uncertainty, which in principle includes the experimental uncertainties as well.
However, the pure fit uncertainty when only fitting αs (mZ ) is tiny, 0.06 × 10−3 , so we simply refer to this
uncertainty as the perturbative one, regardless of the use of profiling.

– 29 –

rel. difference to central N4LL[%]

10
2+1
LL vs N4LL post-fit
9 SCETlib N
pp → Z (8 TeV)
8
MSHTaN3LO, 80 < mll < 100 GeV, |Y | < 1.6
7
Γcusp
H
Bqg
6
S
γ
total
µ
5
Bqq
total pre-fit
γν
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30

qT [GeV]

−0.4

N

2+1

∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.2 0.0
0.2

LL vs N LL
post-fit ∆αs
4

0.4

Z qT Asimov

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 1
Bqg
Bqq
S
H
γν
γµ
Γcusp

−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0

0.5

post fit constraint

1.0

1.5

Figure 5. Left panel: Uncertainties in the qT spectrum at N2+1 LL relative to the N4 LL, before
(yellow band) and after (orange band) profiling the TNPs. The different lines show the post-fit
relative impact of each TNP. Right panel: Post-fit constraints on the TNPs (error bars) and their
impact on αs (mZ ), with the solid (dashed) grey band showing the impact of the post-fit downward
(upward) TNP variations. The stars indicate the true values of the TNPs.

model is not overconstrained to the point that neglected yet higher-order terms become
relevant for determining the theory uncertainty [34]. The right panel of figure 4 presents
a pull/impact plot for all TNPs. The error bars refer to the bottom x-axis and show the
post-fit constraints for each TNP. The solid (dashed) grey bars refer to the top x-axis and
show the corresponding impact on αs (mZ ) due to each TNPs downward (upward) postfit uncertainty.5 The post-fit central value for all TNPs is 0, in perfect agreement with
their values in the pseudodata, as should be the case here. The post-fit constraints on the
individual TNPs are overall not strong. The individual impacts provide further insight
into which TNPs are most important (after profiling) for determining αs (mZ ). Here, γν ,
S, and Bqg have the biggest post-fit impact on αs (mZ ) and they are also the ones that are
somewhat constrained. This indicates that these parameters have the strongest correlation
with αs (mZ ). Of course, to study the exact correlations between all parameters in detail,
one has to examine the post-fit covariance matrix.
4.2.3

Profiling against N4 LL

To further explore the profiling with TNPs, we next perform more general Asimov fits where
the pseudodata is generated from the highest N4 LL central prediction, still evaluated at
αs (mZ ) = 0.118, while using different orders for the theory model, specifically N2+1 LL and
N3+1 LL. Since the N4 LL result contains the true values of the TNPs, this setup mimics
the fit to real data, which contain nature’s all-order result, and provides a realistic test of
5

The impacts are evaluated by repeating the fit while fixing each TNP one at a time to its post-fit value
plus/minus its post-fit uncertainty. The difference of the obtained αs (mZ ) to the result of the nominal fit
gives the impact on αs (mZ ).

– 30 –

rel. difference to central N4LL[%]

∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2

4

3

N

SCETlib N3+1LL vs N4LL post-fit
pp → Z (8 TeV)

2

H
S
Bqq

γµ
γν

LL vs N LL
post-fit ∆αs
4

0.3

Z qT Asimov

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 1

MSHTaN3LO, 80 < mll < 100 GeV, |Y | < 1.6

Γcusp

3+1

Bqg

Bqg

Bqq

total
total pre-fit

S

1

H
γν

0
−1
0

γµ
Γcusp

5

10

15

20

25

30

−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0

0.5

post-fit constraint

qT [GeV]

1.0

1.5

Figure 6. Left panel: Uncertainties in the qT spectrum at N3+1 LL relative to the N4 LL, before
(yellow band) and after (orange band) profiling the TNPs. The different lines show the post-fit
relative impact of each TNP. Right panel: Post-fit constraints on the TNPs (error bars) and their
impact on αs (mZ ), with the solid (dashed) grey band showing the impact of the post-fit downward
(upward) TNP variations. The stars indicate the true values of the TNPs.

whether the TNPs are correctly constrained and whether we can recover their true values
at this order.
In figure 5, we consider the case where the theory model is given by the N2+1 LL
prediction. The left panel shows the pre-fit and post-fit uncertainties for the qT spectrum
analogous to the left panel of figure 4 but now relative to the true N4 LL result. The
profiling again leads to a significant reduction in the uncertainty. Furthermore, we see that
the post-fit prediction is now pulled toward the true result, with a significant adjustment
of the shape of the spectrum. Whilst the shape of the pre-fit prediction differs from the
true shape, the post-fit prediction closely reproduces it.
The right panel of figure 5 shows the corresponding pull plot for the TNPs (analogous
to the right panel of figure 4) with the true values of the TNPs marked by stars. The
fitted TNPs at N2+1 LL now exhibit strong pulls toward their true values, showing that, as
for the qT spectrum, the fit is moving the theory model in the right direction also at the
level of individual TNPs. This is exactly what we would like to happen in this situation
where the data has a higher precision than the pre-fit theory constraint. However, some of
the TNPs, such as γν , Bqq , and in particular Bqg , are quite strongly constrained now. A
tight post-fit constraint implies that the corresponding parameter at the next higher-order
becomes relevant. In other words, we are starting to “overfit” the N2+1 LL theory model.
The precision of the data is starting to exceed the inherent precision of the theory model,
suggesting that it is becoming insufficient and using a higher-order theory-model might be
warranted.
In figure 6 we repeat the same exercise with the N3+1 LL theory model. The postfit uncertainties for the qT spectrum are very similar to those in figure 4 when profiling

– 31 –

SCETlib

Z qT Asimov

profiled against N4 LL (ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

N4+0LL

+0.41
−0.37

N3+1LL

+0.47
−0.50

N3+0LL

+0.44
−0.43

N2+1LL

+0.66
−0.62

0.116

0.117

0.118

0.119

0.120

αs(mZ )

Figure 7. Perturbative uncertainties on αs (mZ ) when profiling the TNPs at different orders against
the central N4 LL prediction. The numerically displayed uncertainties are in units of 10−3 .

N3+1 LL against itself, except that now the central value is shifted toward the true result.
The same holds at the level of individual TNPs. Their post-fit uncertainties are very similar
to before, while their central values are shifted toward their true values, which is again as
we would like it to be. Compared to the N2+1 LL case, the TNPs are now less constrained,
as expected, with no indications yet of overfitting the theory model.
In figure 7, we present the results for αs (mZ ) when profiling the TNPs at various orders
against the N4 LL pseudodata. The uncertainty on αs (mZ ) is only slightly larger at N2+1 LL
than at N3+1 LL, which highlights the fact that after profiling it is largely driven by the
constraints imposed by the measurement on the theory model. In addition, we also include
results at N3+0 LL and N4+0 LL – these orders serve as approximations of N3+1 LL and
N4+1 LL, respectively, see appendix B.2 for their definition and a more detailed discussion.
While these approximations lack the correct formal structure of their corresponding higher
orders, we include them here for completeness. Note that although N4+0 LL is technically
our currently highest available order, we prefer to use N3+1 LL as our nominal theory model,
because it has the correct theory correlation structure. Furthermore, its theory precision
is sufficiently high compared to the measurement precision and after profiling it yields
uncertainties comparable to N4+0 LL.
At both N2+1 LL and N3+1 LL we observe a small bias in the fitted central value of
αs (mZ ). First note that when fitting the lower-order theory model against the higher-order
pseudodata, we intentionally introduce a mismatch. Without profiling, this naturally leads
to a potential bias in αs (mZ ) as it potentially absorbs some of the deficiencies of the theory
model. This type of bias is actually what is estimated and supposed to be covered by the
scanning approach (for either TNPs or scale variations). Indeed, fitting the central N2+1 LL
and N3+1 LL models against N4 LL and evaluating the uncertainty by scanning over TNPs,
we find αs (mZ ) = 0.1211 ± 0.0044 and αs (mZ ) = 0.1195 ± 0.0018, respectively. The biases
compared to the correct value of 0.118 are thus indeed covered by their respective scanning
uncertainties.

– 32 –

When profiling the TNPs, the fit is allowed to improve the theory model by moving
the TNPs toward their true values, which reduces this type of bias. Nonetheless, in doing
so the fit must balance the theory and data constraint. The true values of some of the
parameters, shown as stars in the pull plots, can always happen to be of order the size
of the theory constraint away from 0. As a result, the fit picks up penalties as it tries to
move the parameters to their true values, which induces a residual bias in αs (mZ ) due to
the imposed theory constraint. Importantly, we observe that this type of residual bias is
much smaller and practically negligible compared to the output uncertainties.
To summarize, our profiling results highlight the full power of the TNP approach: Our
Asimov tests demonstrate that when profiling the TNPs, they are properly constrained by
the data and pulled toward their true values, leaving only a negligible residual bias. The
high precision of the data thus allows us to consistently reduce the theory uncertainties and
to achieve the sensitivity required for an extraction of αs (mZ ) at the (sub)percent level.
We have to caution, however, since as discussed in section 3.2.3, with the minimal set
of TNPs we use here, there still remain neglected sources of uncertainty, which could still
enlarge the perturbative uncertainty on αs (mZ ). Whilst some of these can be anticipated
to be negligible, such as the singlet contributions to the hard function given the observed
minor impact of the hard function on αs (mZ ), others may yield nonnegligible additional
contributions. In particular, given the notable impact of the already included beam function
uncertainties, the impact of higher order structures in the beam functions are such an
example. Another example are the perturbative uncertainties due to PDF evolution, which
are not yet accounted for by the TNPs, but which could be of relevance (as also indicated
by the nontrivial size of ∆f in the scale-variation approach). The same caveats of course
also apply to our earlier scanning results.
4.2.4

Dependence on pre-fit theory constraints

The final aspect we would like to discuss concerns the pre-fit theory constraints imposed on
the TNPs, as discussed in sections 3.2.3 and 3.4. So far, our default choice has been ∆θn =
1. As the adopted theory constraint ultimately depends on some theoretical judgement,
we might question whether it is overly restrictive and to what extent the uncertainties we
find depend on it. These issues have already been discussed in Ref. [34]. Here, we provide
a practical application allowing us to explicitly answer these questions.
When the theory constraints on TNPs and the precision of the data are of comparable
size – such that neither clearly dominates – both central value and uncertainty of the
parameters of interest will in principle depend on the theory constraint. As we have seen,
the profiling already essentially eliminates the bias in the central value. One key message
to emphasize is that profiling also substantially reduces the dependence of the uncertainties
on the theory constraint.6 In contrast, during scanning, the uncertainty on αs (mZ ) directly
depends on the chosen theory constraint.
To demonstrate this, we can relax the theory constraint by increasing ∆θn . This
effectively reduces the weight of the theory constraint and allows the data to play a larger
6

This was also discussed in Ref. [59] in the context of the theory nuisance parameters employed in their
approximate N3 LO PDF fit.

– 33 –

∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
N3+1LL vs N4LL
post-fit ∆αs

0.3

Z qT Asimov

∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
N3+1LL vs N4LL
post-fit ∆αs

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

0.3

Z qT Asimov

∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
N3+1LL vs N4LL
post-fit ∆αs

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 1

∆θn = 4

Bqg

Bqg

Bqq

Bqq

Bqq

S

S

S

H

H

H

γν

γν

γν

γµ

γµ

γµ

Γcusp

−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0

0.5

post-fit constraint

1.0

1.5

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 2

Bqg

Γcusp

0.3

Z qT Asimov

Γcusp

−2

−1

0

1

post fit constraint

2

−4 −3 −2 −1 0

1

2

post fit constraint

3

4

Figure 8. Post-fit constraints on TNPs at N3+1 LL profiled against the N4 LL central prediction
using different pre-fit theory constraints, left panel: ∆θn = 1, central panel: ∆θn = 2 and right
panel: ∆θn = 4. The stars indicate the true values of the TNPs.

role in constraining the TNPs and thus determining the final uncertainty. We again use
the N3+1 LL prediction as theory model and profile it against the N4 LL pseudodata and
now vary the pre-fit constraints by factors of 2, setting ∆θn = 1, 2, 4.
In figure 8, we show the resulting pull plots. As the pre-fit uncertainty on the TNPs
is increased, also the post-fit uncertainty on the TNPs increases but much less so for some
TNPs. Overall, the post-fit values become more and more compatible within uncertainties
with the TNPs’ true values, because it becomes easier for the fit to move the TNPs to their
true values. With ∆θn = 4, the constraints on certain TNPs become stronger relative to
the pre-fit constraint and the less constrained TNPs. This is expected since with ∆θn = 4
the TNPs become essentially unconstrained, which makes the differing sensitivities to the
various TNPs more clear as the data acts to constrain the most relevant TNPs. When
relaxing the theory constraint, the TNPs having the strongest impact on αs (mZ ) remain
the same, namely γν , S, and Bqg . However, their individual impacts reduce while the
impact of the other TNPs increases.
In figure 9, we show the results for αs (mZ ) for all three cases. Interestingly, despite
the shifts in the impacts of individual TNPs, the total uncertainty on αs (mZ ) remains
essentially unchanged. This shows that the total uncertainty after profiling is essentially
driven by the constraints imposed by the data. The precise theory constraint does not
affect the total uncertainty but only the relative distribution of the uncertainties among
the TNPs. This is the case in a situation like ours here where the uncertainties of the data
are ≲ the pre-fit theory uncertainties, i.e., in a situation where without profiling we would
be limited by theory uncertainties. In the opposite situation, where the data uncertainties
are larger than the pre-fit theory uncertainties, the theory uncertainty will depend on
the theory constraint also after profiling simply because the data will be too weak to
constrain the theory uncertainties. However, in this situation the theory uncertainties are
subdominant to begin with, and whilst the theory uncertainty itself will depend more on the
adopted theory constraint, the total uncertainty will not. Therefore, as discussed before,

– 34 –

SCETlib N3+1LL
against N4LL

Z qT Asimov
(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 4

+0.51
−0.47

∆θn = 2

+0.49
−0.48

∆θn = 1

+0.47
−0.50

0.116

0.117

0.118

0.119

0.120

αs(mZ )

Figure 9. Perturbative uncertainties on αs (mZ ) when profiling TNPs at N3+1 LL against the
N4 LL central prediction using different pre-fit theory constraints ∆θn = 1, 2, 4. The displayed
uncertainties are in units of 10−3 .

the only situation to be avoided is that the inherent precision of the theory model, i.e.,
the order to which TNPs are included is too low compared to the data precision such that
it becomes overconstrained. In this case, the theory model can be improved by including
additional TNP orders.
As already discussed in the context of figure 7, there is a minor bias in the central
value of αs (mZ ) due to the ∆θn = 1 theory constraint. Now, as the theory constraint is
weakened, the true values of the TNPs lie well within it, so the associated penalties are
reduced. As a result, the bias further reduces for ∆θn = 2 and disappears completely for
∆θn = 4.
Based on these results, we are confident in our default choice of ∆θn = 1. In case
one is worried about the associated theoretical prejudice, it can always be relaxed. Even
in the extreme case of ∆θn = 4, which here amounts to practically removing the theory
constraint, the data are still able to sufficiently constrain the TNPs on their own. Most
importantly, the conclusions of our study do not depend on the precise theory constraint.

5

Nonperturbative Effects

In this section we investigate another major source of uncertainty: qT -dependent nonperturbative effects as discussed in section 3.3. We consider the nonperturbative contributions
from both the CS kernel and the TMD PDF boundary condition, with two parameters for
each, which we find to be the minimal necessary set.
Throughout this section, we use the central N4 LL prediction at αs (mZ ) = 0.118 as
pseudodata, while the theory model is given by the N3+1 LL prediction. We adopt the
nonperturbative models for the CS kernel and TMD PDF discussed in section 3.3.2. Their
parameters λ2,4 and Λ2,4 directly correspond to the leading quadratic and quartic OPE
coefficients, which are expected to be the dominant effects. In the pseudodata, they are
fixed to their central values, while in the theory model they are now treated as additional

– 35 –

rel. difference to central N4LL[%]

4

SCETlib N

3+1

∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4

LL vs N LL post-fit
pp → Z (8 TeV)
4

N

LL vs N LL
post-fit ∆αs
4

λ2
λ4
Λ2
Λ4

2

1

0.6

Z qT Asimov

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 1

MSHTaN3LO, 80 < mll < 100 GeV, |Y | < 1.6

3

Λ2
Λ4
λ2
λ4
Bqg
Bqq

TNPs
nonpert.
TNPs ⊕ nonp.

S
H
γν
γµ

0
−1
0

3+1

Γcusp

5

10

15

20

25

30

−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0

0.5

post fit constraint

qT [GeV]

1.0

1.5

Figure 10. Left panel: Uncertainties in the qT spectrum at N3+1 LL relative to the N4 LL, due to the
nonperturbative parameters (purple band), the TNPs (orange band) and their sum in quadrature
band (in dark orange). The different lines show the post-fit relative impact of each nonperturbative
parameter in the spectrum. Right panel: Post-fit constraints on the TNPs and nonperturbative
parameters (error bars) and their impact on αs (mZ ), with the solid (dashed) grey band showing
the impact of the post-fit downward (upward) variations of each parameter. The stars indicate the
true value of the parameters. The post-fit constraints for Λ2 and λ2 (Λ4 and λ4 ) are normalized to
0.25 GeV2 (0.06 GeV4 ).

fit parameters. The parameters Λ∞ and λ∞ , which control the large bT behaviour, are
always kept fixed as the fit has practically no sensitivity to them. This confirms the
expectation that the dominant nonperturbative sensitivity indeed comes from the small-bT
behaviour, where the OPE applies and determines the bT dependence of nonperturbative
contributions.
Our nominal result thus corresponds to profiling the TNPs at N3+1 LL along with λ2,4
for the CS kernel and Λ2,4 for the TMD PDFs. For λ2,4 we impose the representative lattice
constraints in Eqs. (3.34) and (3.35) as prior Gaussian constraints. As we will see, including
the lattice constraints for λ2,4 helps guide the exploration of parameter space, allowing the
data to determine the TMD parameters Λ2,4 , which contribute to the uncertainty but for
which we otherwise lack constraints from first-principles calculations.
In figure 10, we show the result of our nominal fit including nonperturbative parameters. The left panel displays the breakdown of the post-fit uncertainties in the qT spectrum.
The uncertainty due to the nonperturbative parameters is shown in violet, the perturbative
uncertainty due to TNPs is shown in orange, and their combined uncertainty is represented
by the dark orange band, which corresponds to the total post-fit uncertainty for this Asimov test.7 We do not show a pre-fit band here, since we do not have pre-fit constraints
7

When profiling multiple sources of uncertainty, the breakdown of the total uncertainty into individual
components is somewhat ambiguous. Here, we obtain the individual bands on the qT spectrum by considering the relevant sub-matrices of the total post-fit covariance matrix. One benefit of the Asimov approach

– 36 –

N3+1LL vs N4LL

no nonp.

profiled TNPs
no TNPs

Z qT Asimov

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

Λ2,4, λ2,4
+ lattice

+0.06, +0.47
−0.06, −0.50
+0.24, +0.69
−0.26, −0.72
+1.41

Λ2,4, λ2

−1.41
+0.19, +0.67
−0.19, −0.71

Λ2,4

0.115 0.116 0.117 0.118 0.119 0.120 0.121

αs(mZ )

Figure 11. Uncertainty on αs (mZ ) from various Asimov tests. Red bars include TNP profiling (i.e.,
fitting αs (mZ ) together with all theory nuisance parameters). Below, we show cases excluding TNP
profiling, in blue, with different sets of fitted parameters. From top to bottom: fit only αs (mZ ), fit
αs (mZ ), λ2,4 , Λ2,4 including lattice QCD constraints for CS kernel parameters, fit αs (mZ ), λ2 and
Λ2,4 , fit αs (mZ ) and Λ2,4 . All the uncertainties are in units of 10−3 .

for Λ2,4 . The perturbative pre-fit uncertainty corresponds to the one shown in figure 6.
Overlaid on the plot are the post-fit relative impacts of each nonperturbative parameter.
A strong negative correlation emerges between λ2 and Λ2 , as evident from their significant
impact on the spectrum despite the relatively small size of the overall nonperturbative
uncertainty. In the right panel of the same figure, we show the constraints on all fit parameters, along with their individual impacts on αs (mZ ). Compared to the purely perturbative
case discussed in section 4.2.3, the post-fit constraints on the TNPs are still consistent with
their true values (indicated by stars), but some are now not as strongly constrained by the
data. Due to the additional fit parameters introduced, the data has additional freedom
now to determine which parameters are most relevant in reducing the uncertainty on the
parameter of interest. It is clear that some nonperturbative parameters, especially Λ2,4 ,
have a large impact on αs (mZ ).
Next, we explore the relationship between the nonperturbative effects and the uncertainty on αs (mZ ), and how the TNPs behave in this context. Figure 11 presents the
results of several Asimov fits as discussed next. For each case, we display two uncertainty
bars. The outer red bars show the total uncertainty of the nominal fit simultaneously
profiling TNPs and nonperturbative parameters. The inner blue bars show the uncertainty
associated with fitting αs (mZ ) alongside the nonperturbative parameters only. They are
obtained by repeating the fit fixing the TNPs to their nominal post-fit central values.
At the top of the plot, we show the baseline result previously discussed in section 4.2.3,
however is that we can also consider different sources in isolation, as was done for the TNP component in
section 4.2.

– 37 –

with no nonperturbative parameter included in the fit. In this case, the inner blue uncertainty is the uncertainty due to only fitting αs (mZ ) with all the other theory parameters
fixed, yielding an uncertainty of ∆fit = 0.06 × 10−3 . Including the TNPs in the fit increases
−3
the uncertainty to ∆pert =+0.47
−0.50 ×10 . (As before, we ignore the very small contribution
from ∆fit and simply refer to ∆pert here and similarly for ∆nonp below.)
We now investigate what happens when also fitting the nonperturbative parameters.
Starting from the bottom of the plot, the first test we perform involves fitting only the Λ2,4
parameters of the TMD PDF, while keeping the parameters of the CS kernel, λ2,4 , fixed
−3
at their central values. This yields a total uncertainty of ∆pert⊕nonp =+0.67
−0.71 ×10 .
In addition to the TMD PDF, we also have to account for the nonperturbative uncertainties due to the CS kernel. We find that including in addition λ2,4 in the fit without any
further constraints on them does not yield a stable fit. Including only λ2 the full fit including TNPs is barely able to converge and does not yield sensible uncertainties. We are only
able to obtain a trustworthy result when including Λ2,4 together with λ2 while fixing the
TNPs. It yields a very large nonperturbative uncertainty of ∆nonp = ±1.41 × 10−3 . This
results suggests that without additional constraints, the Drell-Yan data may not provide
sufficient sensitivity to reliably extract αs (mZ ) together with all relevant nonperturbative
parameters.
Fortunately, as discussed in section 3.3, the CS kernel can be constrained using lattice
QCD data. Incorporating these constraints – via both the central values from Eq. (3.34)
and the associated covariance matrix in Eq. (3.35) – enables us to include both λ2,4 in the
fit, alongside the TMD PDF parameters Λ2,4 . This yields our nominal fit already shown
in figure 10. The αs (mZ ) uncertainties resulting from this fit are
−3
,
∆nonp =+0.24
−0.26 ×10
−3
.
∆pert⊕nonp =+0.69
−0.72 ×10

(5.1)

While this outcome happens to match closely the case where only the TMD parameters
were varied, this is somewhat of a coincidence as it depends on the relative size of the
constraints provided by the data and lattice results. Nevertheless, it is very encouraging as
it demonstrates that it is possible to consistently account for all relevant nonperturbative
parameters in this scenario.
Given the sensitivity of the low-qT region to nonperturbative effects, and the resulting
dependence of αs (mZ ) on the nonperturbative parameters, one could consider performing fits using only data above a certain qT threshold, such as qT > 5 GeV or 10 GeV.
This would reduce the dependence on nonperturbative effects, potentially allowing for a
cleaner determination of αs (mZ ) at the expense of increased fit uncertainties. A detailed
investigation of this approach is left to future work.

6

Conclusions

We have presented an analysis of the expected theory uncertainties in the determination of
the strong coupling constant from the Z-boson transverse momentum (qT ) spectrum. The

– 38 –

Z qT spectrum is a benchmark observable of the LHC precision programme and has been
measured to subpercent precision. This offers the potential for a high-precision determination of the strong coupling constant, with a percent level change of αs (mZ ) inducing a
similar level change in the shape of the qT spectrum.
A competitive determination of αs (mZ ) depends crucially on the control of the theoretical uncertainties. However, to determine whether a 1% theory effect causes a 0.5% or
2% effect on αs (mZ ), a reliable, precise description of the shape of the theory uncertainties
is required. Therefore, a robust treatment of theory correlations across the relevant region
of qT is critical.
As the dependence on αs arises out of the perturbative expansion, one major source
of theory uncertainty is the perturbative uncertainty from missing higher orders. Furthermore, with the largest αs sensitivity originating from the region around 5 GeV, nonperturbative effects are also important. In this work we focus largely upon the perturbative
uncertainty, in addition to analysing the nonperturbative effects. To do so, we utilise an
Asimov fit setup, taking the binning, experimental uncertainty and correlations of the ATLAS 8 TeV inclusive Z qT measurement [19] as an example. This allows us to focus our
efforts on the dominant expected theory uncertainties on αs (mZ ) and analyse them in a
fully controlled setting without having to worry about statistical fluctuations or possible
biases due to unaccounted effects in the data.
First, considering the perturbative uncertainty, we find that the traditional approach
of varying unphysical scales is insufficient. In particular, in this context it suffers from
fundamental limitations as it offers only partial information on the theory uncertainty
itself and no insight on its correlations. As a result, the uncertainty one might obtain
on αs (mZ ) from this approach strongly depends on the specific choices and variations
performed, demonstrating that it cannot be relied upon to propagate the uncertainty. Our
main focus is therefore on exploring the new theory nuisance parameter (TNP) approach
to assess this vital source of uncertainty. A key advantage of this approach is that the
TNPs encode the higher-order structure of the theory prediction. As such, they are true
parameters of the perturbative series and their variation correctly encapsulates the pointby-point correlations of the theory uncertainty. This allows for the first time for a consistent
profiling approach to perturbative theory uncertainties, enabling the fit to the experimental
data to constrain the theory uncertainty. We utilise our Asimov fit setup to explore this
possibility in this context, also serving to demonstrate the benefits of the novel TNP
approach in general. We find that profiling the theory uncertainties is vital to reach the
level of precision desired on αs (mZ ).
Secondly, we explore the nonperturbative uncertainty in the extraction of αs (mZ ). We
utilise a nonperturbative parameterization based on a systematic OPE expansion of nonperturbative effects including both the nonperturbative effects of the Collins-Soper kernel
and of the TMD PDF, accounting for the quadratic and quartic OPE coefficients of each.
We find that reaching a competitive precision on αs (mZ ) necessitates the incorporation of
nonperturbative constraints on the Collins-Soper kernel from lattice QCD.8
8

At least when only using the experimentally most precise Drell-Yan data at the Z pole.

– 39 –

Whilst these constitute two of the largest sources of uncertainty for the determination
of αs (mZ ), there are a variety of further effects relevant at the desired level of precision.
PDF uncertainties are also large, and whilst they can in principle be treated in a straightforward fashion, there are various subtleties which we leave to future work. The TNPs used
to account for the perturbative uncertainty are also not yet complete: the x dependence
of the beam functions currently utilises the known shape, whilst uncertainties arising from
the PDF evolution within the resummation are yet to be incorporated. At the same time,
a variety of effects that could be neglected in the Asimov test case need to be included in
a fit to real data. These include nonsingular power corrections, heavy quark mass effects,
QED/EW corrections, and the x and flavor dependence of nonperturbative TMD effects.
Overall, our analysis demonstrates the crucial role of theory uncertainties and their
correlations in the extraction of αs (mZ ). Reliably propagating these from the qT spectrum
to the strong coupling is a complex task, which nonetheless can be achieved thanks to
the TNP approach. Furthermore, the TNP approach allows for a data-driven reduction
of perturbative uncertainties. Meanwhile, the nonperturbative uncertainty can be reduced
with the help of lattice QCD data. Together, this facilitates the reduction of these key
uncertainties to a level which we anticipate will allow for an extraction of αs (mZ ) from the
Drell-Yan qT spectrum that is competitive with other measurements.

Acknowledgments
We thank Peter Ploessl and Bahman Dehnadi for providing results with quark-mass effects
from Ref. [66], and Johannes Michel and Iain Stewart for useful discussions and comments
on the manuscript. We also thank our experimental colleagues for many helpful discussions.
Last but not least, we thank Johannes Michel, Georgios Billis, and Markus Ebert for their
many contributions to the SCETlib code base. This project has received funding from
the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 101002090 COLORFREE) and from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s
Excellence Strategy – EXC 2121 “Quantum Universe” – 390833306. TC acknowledges
funding by Research Foundation-Flanders (FWO) project number: 12E1323N.

A

Comments on Recent αs Extraction by ATLAS

In this appendix, we comment on the treatment of theory uncertainties in Ref. [33], which
performed a fit to the Drell-Yan qT spectrum measured in Ref. [19] to extract αs (mZ ).
In the next three subsections we discuss the three uncertainties of perturbative origin
that according to our estimates are dominant.9 In appendix A.4, we comment on the
nonperturbative model used in Ref. [33].
9

Additional perturbative uncertainties are due to QED ISR and the matching to fixed order. They are
estimated in Ref. [33] to not be significant, which we also believe to be the case, so we do not discuss them
here.

– 40 –

Absolute uncertainty on αs (mZ ) in units of 10−3
Perturbative uncertainty

Ref. [33]

Our estimate of expected size

Scale variations

±0.42

±2.43

N4 LL∗ approximation

±0.04

N4 LL′

±0.75

approximation

Flavor/quark masses

+0.40 −0.29

±1.32

Total

+0.58 −0.51

±2.87

Table 2. Dominant uncertainties of perturbative origin on αs (mZ ) in units of 10−3 . The table
compares the values quoted in Ref. [33] with our estimate of their expected size based on fits to
Asimov data. See text for more details.

In table 2, we summarize our estimates of the expected size of perturbative uncertainties based on fits to Asimov data and compare them to the values quoted in Ref. [33]. For
scale variations, we use the quadrature sum of envelopes here. Using instead the naive
total envelope (1.73 × 10−3 ) leads to a slightly smaller total perturbative uncertainty of
±2.30 × 10−3 . Our uncertainty estimates are based on fits to Asimov data, so while the
precise numbers will differ in a fit to the real data their typical size will be the same. For
the uncertainties due to scale variations, we have explicitly checked in preliminary fits to
real data that the size of the obtained uncertainty is indeed very similar. We thus have
reason to believe that the total theory uncertainty quoted in Ref. [33] is underestimated
by a factor of 4 to 5. This would make it by far the dominant uncertainty and as a result
also the total uncertainty of ±0.9 × 10−3 quoted in Ref. [33] would be underestimated by
about a factor of 3.
A.1

Perturbative uncertainties from scale variations

The analysis in Ref. [33] uses the method of enveloped scale variations discussed in section 2.2 to estimate the perturbative theory uncertainty on the resummed qT spectrum.
This uncertainty is propagated to the fitted αs (mZ ) by scanning over individual scale variations. This yields maximum deviations in αs (mZ ) of +0.23 × 10−3 and −0.61 × 10−3 ,
which are symmetrized to the quoted ±0.42 × 10−3 scale-variation uncertainty on αs (mZ ).
As we have argued in the main text, extracting αs (mZ ) from the small-qT spectrum
crucially relies on shape effects and is therefore extremely sensitive to the theory uncertainty
on the shape of the spectrum and the corresponding bin-by-bin theory correlations. As
discussed in detail in section 2.2, these are not correctly captured by scale variations, which
means the resulting variations in the fitted αs (mZ ) cannot be regarded as a trustworthy
uncertainty estimate. Scanning over scale variations in section 4.1 we find significantly
larger maximum variations in the fitted αs (mZ ), as seen in the right panel of figure 2.
The envelope over all scale variations yields 1.73 × 10−3 , while adding in quadrature the
envelopes of different classes of scale variations yields 2.43 × 10−3 , see Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2).
Our scale-variation study is performed at N4 LL, which is the currently highest known

– 41 –

(essentially) complete perturbative order. It yields uncertainties of 0.5 − 1% in the range
5 GeV < qT < 30 GeV and growing up to 3 − 4% for 0 < qT < 5 GeV, as seen in the left
panel of figure 2. Unfortunately, from the limited information given in Ref. [33] it is not
clear what the exact size of the scale-variation based uncertainties on the qT spectrum are
at their highest used order (denoted N4 LL∗ in the next subsection). From our own runs
of the public version of DYturbo (v1.4.2) we find spectrum uncertainties of 0.5 − 1%
for qT < 30 GeV and growing to 2 − 3% for qT → 0.10 Therefore, the envelope of scale
variations used in Ref. [33] at the level of the qT spectrum should be of similar size to ours
here. This means, for similar-size scale variations in the qT spectrum we obtain up to five
times larger variations in αs (mZ ).
One difference which could (at least partially) contribute to this large discrepancy is
that the scale-variation recipes used in the SCETlib and DYturbo resummation frameworks differ. Whilst both use the conventional factor of two for varying scales up and
down and avoid simultaneous variations that would compound to factors of four in any
scale ratios, the specific types of scale variations differ substantially and are more limited
in DYturbo. In particular, the low scale ∼ qT ∼ 1/bT is varied as part of the scale
variation setup in SCETlib, while it is kept fixed in DYturbo. We stress that there
are no compelling theoretical arguments for keeping this low scale fixed when estimating
uncertainties using scale variations.11
As discussed in section 2, in a situation like this where theory correlations are critically
important, for the same overall uncertainty in the spectrum, the resulting uncertainty on
αs (mZ ) entirely depends on the specific scale variations that happen to be included in the
scanning. A similar breakdown into individual scale variations as in our figure 2 of the
results in Ref. [33] might shed some more light on this. Ultimately, however, the large
discrepancies we observe between different resummation frameworks using different scale
variation recipes likely just reflect the fact that the scale-variation method cannot be relied
upon for propagating the perturbative uncertainty from the qT spectrum to αs (mZ ).
Nevertheless, if scale variations are the method of choice, one must be aware of their
limitations and at minimum it must be ensured that a given scale-variation recipe does not
underestimate the resulting uncertainty on the parameter of interest. For this purpose, we
have clear evidence that the type of scale variations performed in SCETlib yield a more realistic uncertainty for αs (mZ ). This is because when scanning over TNPs, which do encode
the correct theory correlations, spectrum uncertainties of comparable (or even somewhat
smaller) size translate into an uncertainty on αs (mZ ) of 1.75 × 10−3 (see section 4.2.1 and
figure 3), which is similar to what we find with scale variations.
Similarly, in Ref. [30], numerical results for the qT spectrum at this N4 LL∗ order are given for Ecm =
13 TeV and including fiducial lepton cuts, in which case the spectrum uncertainties are also close to around
1%.
11
This low scale is genuine to the resummation problem, as discussed in the following subsection, and
therefore must effectively appear in any resummation framework. It is also kept variable in the original
CSS framework [75] on which DYturbo is based. In the context of an ongoing benchmarking study of
various qT resummation frameworks within the LHC electroweak working group, the need for varying this
low scale has been widely recognized by now and, as far as we can tell, has been gradually adopted also by
most other resummation frameworks.
10

– 42 –

We also stress that the much reduced perturbative uncertainty on αs (mZ ) that we find
after profiling the TNPs cannot be taken to justify the much smaller scale-variation based
uncertainties quoted in Ref. [33], because the TNP profiling allows the data to improve the
overall precision of the theory description (and for example also induces nontrivial postfit correlations between different TNPs). In other words, the resulting theory description
obtained as an output after profiling the TNPs has an intrinsically higher precision than
what can be ascribed to a traditional input theory prediction based on scale variations.
We finally note that another possible difference is that we are fitting only αs (mZ )
when scanning over scale variations in section 4.1, whereas in Ref. [33] also the PDFs and
some nonperturbative parameters are included in the fit. In principle, it could happen that
other fit parameters absorb some of the scale variations such that their impact on αs (mZ )
is reduced. For this to be the case, the effect of a particular scale variation would have
to match the shape change induced by adjusting another fit parameter better than that
induced by adjusting αs (mZ ), which would make the sensitivity to the precise shape of
the theory uncertainty even more relevant. By including nonperturbative parameters or
PDFs in our fit while scanning over TNPs (as they provide the correct theory uncertainty
shapes), we find that this is not the case, i.e., including these additional fit parameters
does not alter the impact of the perturbative uncertainties on αs (mZ ).
A.2

Different N4 LL countings and approximation uncertainties

Different nomenclatures for resummation orders involving Sudakov double-logarithms appear in the literature. A common nomenclature, which we also use here, is such that at
Nn LL one includes the n-loop evolution (i.e. n-loop noncusp and (n + 1)-loop cusp anomalous dimensions) together with (n − 1)-loop fixed-order boundary conditions of the hard,
beam, and soft functions in our notation. At Nn LL′ order the boundary conditions are
included at one order higher, i.e., at n-loop order and as they appear at Nn+1 LL. As a
result, the perturbative precision at Nn LL′ is often close to Nn+1 LL and thus much higher
than Nn LL. This is summarized in table 3.
The Nn LL nomenclature used in Refs. [30, 33] also includes n-loop boundary terms, and
for clarity we will refer to it as Nn LL∗ here. According to Ref. [30], this N4 LL∗ supposedly
provides a reliable approximation of N4 LL′ , with the implied higher perturbative precision
compared to standard N4 LL. However, there is a crucial difference in how the boundary
terms are included at Nn LL∗ , making it rather different from N4 LL′ and with a perturbative
precision more comparable to standard N4 LL, as indicated in table 3 and as we will discuss
now.
Let us first consider the soft function. As discussed in section 3.2, the full soft function
S̃(bT , µ, ν) is a perturbative series in αs (µ) and contains Sudakov logarithms lnn (µbT /b0 )
and lnn (νbT /b0 ). Its resummation proceeds by evaluating it at its canonical scales µcan
S =
νScan = b0 /bT [see Eqs. (3.15) and (3.8)], which defines its boundary condition,
X  αs (b0 /bT ) n
s̃[αs (b0 /bT )] ≡ S̃(bT , µ = b0 /bT , ν = b0 /bT ) =
s̃n
,
(A.1)
4π
n=0

– 43 –

boundary conditions

anomalous dimensions

resummation order

h

b̃, s̃

γ µ , γ ν , Pij

Γcusp , β

N3 LL′

αs3 (Q)
αs3 (Q)
αs4 (Q)
αs4 (Q)
αs4 (Q)

αs3 (b0 /bT )
αs3 (b0 /bT )

αs3
αs4
αs4
αs4
αs5

αs4

N4 LL
N4 LL⋆
N4 LL′
N5 LL

αs3 (b0 /bT ) + αs4 (Q)
αs4 (b0 /bT )
αs4 (b0 /bT )

αs5
αs5
αs5
αs6

Table 3. Order counting conventions. Here, N4 LL⋆ refers to what is called N4 LL in Refs. [30, 33].
In practice, the first three rows have a comparable perturbative precision, as have the last two rows.
See the text for further details.

where the s̃n are the so-defined n-loop soft boundary coefficients. The boundary series in
Eq. (A.1) is by construction free of large logarithms and can thus be evaluated at fixed
order in αs . It is the starting point of the evolution from the low scale 1/bT ∼ qT to the
high scale Q, which resums the logarithms of QbT ∼ Q/qT .
The analogous beam boundary condition was already defined in Eq. (3.6),


X
αs (b0 /bT ) n
b̃i [x, αs (b0 /bT )] ≡ B̃i (x, bT , µ = b0 /bT , ν/Q = 1) =
b̃i,n (x)
,
(A.2)
4π
n=0

where as shown in Eq. (3.7) the beam boundary coefficients b̃i,n (x) are computed in terms
of PDFs evaluated at µf = b0 /bT .
Note that the beam and soft boundary conditions in Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) genuinely
appear as a low-scale perturbative series in αs (b0 /bT ). The appearance of a perturbative
series at the low scale µ ∼ b0 /bT ∼ qT is a fundamental and universal feature of qT
resummation and not specific to a particular resummation framework. (It is also the reason
why the beam and soft functions become nonperturbative at sufficiently small qT ∼ 1/bT ,
see section 3.3.)
By contrast, the canonical scale of the hard function is µcan
H = Q, so its boundary
condition is defined as
X  αs (Q) n
2
h̃[αs (Q)] ≡ H(Q , µ = Q) =
h̃n
,
(A.3)
4π
n=0

and thus it genuinely appears as a high-scale perturbative series in αs (Q).
We can now state the difference between Nn LL and Nn LL′ more explicitly: At Nn LL,
the hard, beam, and soft boundary series in Eqs. (A.1), (A.2), and (A.3) are included
in Eq. (3.15) up to fixed O(αsn−1 ) with their respective canonical αs . At Nn LL′ , they are
instead included up to O(αsn ) exactly as they would be at Nn+1 LL. Thus, the only difference
between Nn LL′ and the full Nn+1 LL is that the latter further includes the anomalous
dimensions in the evolution factor in Eq. (3.15) to one order higher, see table 3.
Toward higher orders in qT resummation, the contributions from boundary terms become the dominant effect while the anomalous dimensions become less important. The

– 44 –

Nn LL′ result is therefore numerically close to the full Nn+1 LL result. For example, the
SCETlib results at N3 LL′ and N4 LL are almost indistinguishable in both central value
and scale variation uncertainties [32].12 Furthermore, as the beam and soft boundary coefficients come with a low-scale αs , they are much more important than the hard function.
We have seen this explicitly in section 4.2.
In DYturbo, following Refs. [109, 110], the low-scale boundary series in the CSS
formalism [75], which corresponds to our soft and beam boundary series, is rewritten to
superficially appear as high-scale perturbative series as follows (taking the soft function as
an example):


s̃[αs (b0 /bT )]
s̃[αs (b0 /bT )]
s̃[αs (b0 /bT )] = s̃[αs (Q)] ×
= s̃[αs (Q)] × exp ln
s̃[αs (Q)]
s̃[αs (Q)]

 Z αs (Q)
d ln s̃(αs )
dαs
= s̃[αs (Q)] × exp −
dαs
αs (b0 /bT )
 Z Q

dαs d ln s̃(αs )
= s̃[αs (Q)] × exp −
.
(A.4)
d ln µ
d ln µ
dαs
b0 /bT
The first line is clearly trivial, and in the remaining lines the exponential is further cast
into a form that resembles the exponential evolution factor in Eq. (3.15). As long as s̃(αs )
is consistently included to the same order in αs everywhere it appears, Eq. (A.4) is a strict
identity, i.e., there is no formal or numerical difference between the left-hand side and the
various versions on the right-hand side.13 This is the case at Nn LL and Nn LL′ .
However, in the order-counting adopted at Nn LL∗ , the last line of Eq. (A.4) is used with
the factor s̃[αs (Q)] considered as a fundamental high-scale boundary series, and akin to
the treatment of the hard boundary series at Nn LL′ , it is included to n-loop order (i.e. s̃n ).
At the same time, the exponential factor is considered to be part of the overall evolution
factor, which is included to n-loop order (akin to the evolution order used at Nn LL′ ). As
a result, the s̃(αs ) boundary series in the exponent is only included to (n − 1)-loop order
(i.e. to s̃n−1 ). This is because the running of αs starts at one loop, so the (n − 1)-loop
boundary coefficient s̃n−1 only appears as an n-loop contribution as β0 s̃n−1 .
However, rewriting the boundary series as in Eq. (A.4) does not change the fundamental fact that it is a low-scale series. This fact is merely hidden on the right-hand side.
Reversing the steps in Eq. (A.4) with the Nn LL∗ counting applied to the last line on the
right-hand side, it results in effectively using the following n-loop boundary series on the
left-hand side,
s̃

(n)





n−1
s̃(n−1) [αs (b0 /bT )] X
αs (b0 /bT ) k
αs (Q) n
[αs (Q)] ×
=
s̃k
+ s̃n
,
4π
4π
s̃(n−1) [αs (Q)]
k=0

12

(A.5)

This applies when using common PDFs. Switching from NNLO to approximate N3 LO PDFs, as also
formally required for the PDF evolution when switching from N3 LL′ to N4 LL, does make a noticeable
difference.
13
For the last line in Eq. (A.4), this also requires the running of αs (µ) to be treated in the same way
on both sides of the equation. Otherwise there will be formally higher-order differences which are however
irrelevant for our discussion.

– 45 –

where the superscripts denote the order in αs to which each series is kept. Hence, due
to the mismatch in the treatment of s̃(αs ) between prefactor and exponent, the n-loop
coefficient s̃n remains multiplied by the high-scale αsn (Q), as indicated in table 3, while its
correction to the low scale is postponed to Nn+1 LL∗ . By contrast, it is directly included
at its correct low scale at both Nn LL′ and full Nn+1 LL.
The analogous discussion applies to the beam boundary series, which is rewritten in
the same fashion to appear as a high-scale series, including also PDFs evaluated at the
high scale, multiplied by a corresponding correction factor that also includes the evolution
of the PDFs back down to their natural low scale. At Nn LL∗ , the beam boundary terms
are included at their correct low scale only to b̃i,n−1 , while b̃i,n is included in terms of αs
and PDFs at the high scale.
As a side remark, we comment on the counting of towers of logarithms αsn Lm in
the perturbative series, with some choice of the large logarithm L, which traditionally is
often used to define resummation orders. When counting logarithms in the cross section
(formally counting αs L2 ∼ 1), Nn LL∗ and Nn LL′ capture the same complete logarithmic
towers and one more than Nn LL. When counting logarithms in the exponent (formally
counting αs L ∼ 1), all three orders capture the same complete logarithmic towers. This
does not mean that the orders are equivalent for all purposes. The three orders differ
by including different subsets of higher logarithmic towers, which are well defined and
numerically relevant. This simply means that their relevant distinction is not (or not easily)
visible from a traditional counting of logarithms. Instead, here we define the resummation
order (or formal accuracy) at the level of the RGE and its ingredients, which allows us to
make a formal distinction between the orders as shown in table 3.
This rather peculiar treatment of the low-scale boundary conditions at Nn LL∗ has
several consequences. Since αs (b0 /bT )/αs (Q) can become ≳ 2 at small 1/bT ∼ qT , and this
mismatch is raised to the nth power, the above-mentioned dominant effect of the n-loop
soft and beam boundary coefficients is not yet present at Nn LL∗ . For example, the effect
of s̃4 and b̃i,4 can be easily suppressed by an order of magnitude or more at N4 LL∗ , which
is indeed what we find below. Their full impact then only appears at the next order in the
disguise of a large evolution effect. Moreover, since they are only included as a high-scale
boundary condition like the hard function, also their effect on the shape of the spectrum,
which is particularly relevant for extracting αs , is not yet present. For these reasons, the
N4 LL∗ result does not provide a tangible improvement, formally or practically, compared to
N4 LL. This is confirmed by the comparable scale variations we observed at the spectrum
level in the previous subsection. In particular, and regardless of being approximate or
exact, it does not provide a reliable approximation of N4 LL′ .
The analysis in Ref. [33] is performed at the so-called approximate N4 LL (“N4 LLa”)
order of Ref. [30], meaning at approximate N4 LL∗ . There are two types of approximations
involved: First, the 4-loop evolution is formally approximate, because the required 4-loop
splitting functions and 5-loop cusp anomalous dimensions are only known approximately.
These approximations are also present at N4 LL. They are expected to cause more minor

– 46 –

effects and are not discussed here further.14 The second type of approximation comes from
the fact that the 4-loop beam and soft coefficients, s̃4 and b̃i,4 , are completely unknown.
In Refs. [30, 33] the additional uncertainty due to the 5-loop cusp anomalous dimension
and the unknown 4-loop beam and soft coefficients are estimated to be 0.1 − 0.2% for the
qT spectrum with a resulting negligible ±0.04 × 10−3 effect on αs (mZ ). Since at N4 LL∗ the
latter are effectively treated like a hard-function contribution, this is consistent with the
rather negligible impact of the hard function and cusp anomalous dimension we observe.
However, as explained above, this does not provide a realistic estimate of the actual possible
impact of the missing 4-loop beam and soft coefficients.
The dominant effect of the beam and soft functions is clearly evident in our TNP
studies, where as expected they cause by far the largest uncertainties. From our TNP
scanning at N3+1 LL, we know that the 3-loop beam and soft functions each cause an effect
of order ∼ 1 × 10−3 on αs (mZ ). We might expect the corresponding uncertainties due
to the 4-loop beam and soft functions to be between two and a few times smaller than
that, but certainly not 30 to 40 times smaller. We can obtain a more realistic estimate
of the impact of the missing 4-loop beam and soft functions from their associated TNPs
at N4+0 LL (see appendix B.2).15 From the analogous TNP scanning at this order we find
a combined perturbative uncertainty on αs (mZ ) due to the missing 4-loop beam and soft
functions of 0.75 × 10−3 , as given in table 2, so indeed a reduction by roughly a factor of 2
compared to N3+1 LL in line with expectation. Their full effect would appear at N5 LL∗ and
already by itself can be twice as large as the quoted scale-variation uncertainty at N4 LL∗ ,
providing further evidence that the latter is strongly underestimated.
A.3

Effects due to finite bottom and charm quark masses

The masses of charm and bottom quarks, mc and mb , are usually neglected, which is an
appropriate description in the limit mb,c ≪ qT . On the other hand, for qT ∼ mb,c , which in
the case of mb is right in the peak region of the qT spectrum, they cause nontrivial effects
at the few-percent level. We thus expect them to be important at our level of precision.
For qT ∼ mb , the mass effects genuinely change the resummation structure [65]. They
can be classified into primary and secondary mass effects. Primary mass effects are due to
the quark masses of the incoming quarks in the bb̄ → Z/γ ∗ and cc̄ → Z/γ ∗ hard processes.
Secondary mass effects are due to the quark masses in virtual charm and bottom quark
loops as well as final-state gluons splitting into massive quarks.
It is important to note that switching from a massless 5-flavor description to a massless
4-flavor description at some threshold scale µb ∼ mb is not sufficient to correctly account
for bottom mass effects, since in the region qT ∼ mb neither description is actually valid. A
correct description of the bottom threshold actually requires the correct treatment of the
bottom mass effects. The same holds for the charm threshold, which due to the smaller
charm mass is less relevant in practice.
14

Although the available approximations for 4-loop splitting functions are increasingly accurate for phenomenology [111], their effect could in principle be of some relevance and deserves further study.
15
Ideally, we would use N4+1 LL, which we have not yet available, but N4+0 LL provides a sufficient
approximation for our purposes here.

– 47 –

Ref. [33] uses a massless 5-flavor description by default. The uncertainties due to
neglecting quark-mass effects are estimated by changing to a variable-flavor massless description in various parts of the calculation and by varying the associated threshold scales.
From the above discussion, this can only serve as a rough indication of the expected order
of magnitude of mass effects but it may or may not reflect the actual size of the effects.
Another estimate comes from including the effect of final-state gluon splitting into massive
quark pairs. Unfortunately, Ref. [33] provides no further information than that, so it is
unclear to us to what extent this provides a complete description of secondary mass effects.
The final uncertainty on αs (mZ ) due to mass effects is taken as the envelope of all observed
−3
differences yielding +0.40
−0.29 × 10 .
A full treatment of quark mass effects in the resummed qT spectrum at NNLL′ based
on Ref. [65] has been implemented in SCETlib and will be presented elsewhere [66]. Here,
we use it to estimate the bias induced in the extracted αs (mZ ) from using a massless
description. To do so, we generate Asimov data including bottom and charm mass effects
and fit it with a 5-flavor massless theory model at the same resummation order. We find
a bias on αs (mZ ) of 1.32 × 10−3 , as given in table 2. The effect is entirely driven by
the bottom quark mass. This rather strong sensitivity to mass effects in αs (mZ ) is not
unexpected, given that the dominant sensitivity to αs (mZ ) arises from the peak region of
the spectrum qT ∼ 5 GeV, which is precisely where bottom mass effects are important.
And as we have seen before, order percent shape changes in the qT spectrum can easily
cause changes of order ∼ 1 × 10−3 in αs (mZ ).
A.4

Nonperturbative model

In Ref. [33], nonperturbative effects are incorporated via the following phenomenological
model


Q2
SNP (bT ) = exp −gj (bT ) − gK (bT ) ln 2 ,
Q0
h
i
2
g bT
gj (bT ) = q
+ sign(q) 1 − exp(−|q|b4T ) ,
1 + λ b2T



1 CF αs (b0 /b∗ ) b2T
gK (bT ) = g0 1 − exp −
,
(A.6)
g0
π
b2lim
which must account for the product f˜inp (x, bT )f˜jnp (x, bT ) in our notation of section 3.3, and
where gj (bT ) and gK (bT ) encode the nonperturbative models for the TMD PDF and CS
kernel, respectively.
This model originates from Ref. [94], and while it has traditionally been used in the
past, it has several limitations that are potentially important at the high level of precision
required here. First, the model does not account for any flavor or x dependence in the
nonperturbative TMD parameters, which in general cannot be neglected [31, 99, 100].
As discussed in section 3.3.2, since the fit to real data includes multiple rapidity bins, the
nonperturbative TMD model should at minimum allow for an effective rapidity dependence.

– 48 –

Secondly, the model does not reproduce the OPE expansion in Eq. (3.28). While it
has quadratic and quartic TMD parameters, g and q (equivalent to our Λ2 and Λ4 ), which
are included as fit parameters, it does not have parameters to encode the genuine nonperturbative contributions to the CS kernel. In particular, the O(b2T ) piece of gK (bT ), only
cancels the O(b2T ) contribution induced by the quadratic b∗ prescription used in the perturbative part of the CS kernel. This leaves the genuine nonperturbative OPE contribution
due to λζ2 unaccounted for, which as discussed in section 3.3 is the parametrically leading
nonperturbative effect.
Furthermore, the canonical ln(bT Q) multiplying the CS kernel is replaced by a fixed
ln(Q/Q0 ). This amounts to shifting a corresponding ln(bT Q0 ) dependence into the nonperturbative TMD, which however is not accounted for in gj (bT ). This effectively neglects
a nontrivial bT (and thus qT ) dependence, which could easily spoil the point-by-point correlations of the nonperturbative uncertainties.
In summary, the model does not provide a correct parameterization of nonperturbative
effects in the important region of moderately small qT or 1/bT . The effect of this on the
extraction of αs (mZ ) is a priori unclear and needs further study. For example, as indicated
by our results in section 5, including λ2 as a free parameter in the fit can significantly
enlarge the fit uncertainties. Whilst the model has several additional parameters (λ, g0 ,
blim , Q0 ), which are being varied to estimate additional nonperturbative uncertainties, they
do not assess the impact of these limitations. Ref. [33] also performed a fit excluding the
region of qT ≤ 5 GeV, where nonperturbative effects are expected to have their dominant
impact. This provides a potentially useful test, which however is only necessary and not
sufficient. It would invalidate the model if it gave inconsistent results, but the reverse is
not true – if it gives consistent results this does not validate the model.

B
B.1

Additional Results
Nonsingular power corrections

In this appendix, we briefly investigate the impact of including the nonsingular contribution
in Eq. (3.1), which has been neglected in our main analysis. It is suppressed by O(qT2 /Q2 )
relative to the leading-power resummed contribution dσ (0) , which captures the leading
behaviour of the qT spectrum in the qT → 0 limit. Since the nonsingular is subdominant
for qT ≪ Q, it is typically evaluated at fixed order in αs at the hard scale µ ∼ Q as the
difference

(0) 
dσnons
dσFO dσFO
=
−
,
(B.1)
dqT
dqT
dqT qT >0
(0)

where dσFO is the full fixed-order result and dσFO is the fixed-order expansion of the
leading-power resummed contribution.
The full O(αs ) term, called LO1 , is implemented in SCETlib, while the full O(αs2 )
contribution, referred to as NLO1 , is obtained numerically using DYturbo [112]. We are
primarily interested in checking whether the nonsingular can influence the uncertainty in

– 49 –

Asimov data

theory model

N4 LL+NLO1

N3+1 LL

N4 LL+NLO1

N3+1 LL+LO

N4 LL+NLO1

N3+1 LL+NLO1

αs (mZ ) [10−3 ]
116.34 ± 0.41

1

118.81 ± 0.47
118.09+0.46
−0.49

Table 4. Results for αs (mZ ) in units of 10−3 and its perturbative uncertainty from Asimov tests
including different nonsingular contributions.

αs (mZ ) due to the dominant leading-power uncertainties. We therefore add the nonsingular terms directly to the resummed contribution, without introducing additional nuisance
parameters for them. For computational efficiency, here we include the nonsingular terms
only up to NLO1 . We follow the setup described in section 3.4, with one minor modification: The difference in Eq. (B.1) is subject to large numerical cancellations for qT → 0. To
avoid the associated numerical instabilities we begin the qT binning at 0.5 GeV.
We perform a set of Asimov tests following the procedure in section 4.2.3. For simplicity, we do not fit the nonperturbative parameters here, since doing so does not change our
conclusions. The nominal perturbative uncertainty for this case obtained in section 4.2.3
−3
4
is ∆pert =+0.47
−0.50 ×10 . The Asimov data are now defined as the N LL+NLO1 prediction at αs (mZ ) = 0.118, which we fit with three different theory models that differ in the
nonsingular terms they include. The results are shown in table 4. In the case where no
nonsingular term is included (top row), we find an uncertainty ∆pert = 0.41 × 10−3 , slightly
smaller than the nominal one. Including the LO1 and NLO1 terms (middle and bottom
rows), the uncertainty increases again marginally and closely reproduces the nominal one.
We conclude that under the assumptions and setup of our pseudodata analysis, the nonsingular contributions do not affect the uncertainty of αs (mZ ). They can therefore be safely
neglected for our purposes. However, as also seen in table 4, neglecting the nonsingular
corrections in the theory model induces a substantial bias in the central value of αs (mZ ),
which will necessitate their inclusion in the fit to real data.
B.2

Approximate TNP orders

Here, we briefly discuss an approximate TNP implementation, following Ref. [34], that
may be useful in cases where incorporating the full next-order structure is not feasible for
practical reasons. As an approximation to the Nm+1 LO implementation, one can consider
reusing the structure of the existing Nm LO prediction, absorbing the uncertainty term into
the highest known order. For example, compared to N1+1 LO and N2+1 LO in Eq. (2.9), we
have


N1+0 LO:
f (x, α, θ2 ) = fˆ0 (x) + fˆ1 (x) + α0 f2 (x, θ2 ) α ,


N2+0 LO:
f (x, α, θ3 ) = fˆ0 (x) + fˆ1 (x) α + fˆ2 (x) + α0 f3 (x, θ3 ) α2 .
(B.2)
This approximation is expected to roughly preserve the overall size of the uncertainty
due to θ2 or θ3 , while its shape (and thus the correlation) is approximated based on the
lower-order structure.

– 50 –

Here, α0 is a chosen fixed number, which does not depend on a renormalization scale
and does not participate in counting powers of αs . For a single perturbative series with no
further internal structure, this approximation is somewhat academic. If αs is evaluated at
a fixed central scale and α0 is chosen to agree with that value, then the central Nm+0 LO
result would reproduce the central Nm+1 LO result.
However, as soon as the prediction in question is more complicated, e.g., αs is evaluated
at a dynamic scale or the total prediction involves the combination of several perturbative
series expanded against each other, this approximation becomes nontrivial. This is the
case with resummation, for which the Nm+0 LL result is defined by absorbing the highest
TNP-parameterized terms of all anomalous dimensions and boundary conditions into their
respective previous order terms analogous to Eq. (B.2). For example, compared to N3+1 LL
in Eq. (3.19), we now have


Z L
 αcan 2 
αscan 
s
3+0
can
F
′
N LL: F (αs , L) = 1 + F̂1
+ F̂2 + a0 F3 (θ3 )
exp
dL
4π
4π
0
2

h α (L′ ) i4
h α (L′ ) ik+1
X
s
s
L′ + Γ̂3 + a0 Γ4 (θ4Γ )
L′
Γ̂k
4π
4π
k=0
1
h α (L′ ) i3 
h α (L′ ) ik+1 
X
s
s
γF
+ γ̂F,2 + a0 γF,3 (θ3 )
,
+
γ̂F,k
4π
4π
k=0

(B.3)
where a0 ≡ α0 /(4π) and αscan is again evaluated at the canonical scale of F , which is
usually a dynamic scale. At a more generalized boundary scale, as used in the actual
resummation, the full µ-dependent boundary condition as predicted by the RGE in terms
of F̂1 , F̂2 , Γ̂0 , Γ̂1 , γ̂F,0 , γ̂F,1 is used with F̂2 replaced by F̂2 + a0 F3 (θ3F ) as above. The
products of boundary conditions in the full cross section are expanded keeping terms up to
O(αs2 ) (without counting powers of α0 ). Hence, at N3+0 LL the TNP-dependent uncertainty
terms associated with the missing N4 LL are absorbed into the N3 LL structure, while at
N3+1 LL they appear in the correct N4 LL structure. As emphasized before, using the full
Nm+1 LL result should always be preferred if possible. However, in case it is unavailable or
impractical, the Nm+0 LL result can serve as a viable approximation for it.
In figure 7, we already included the results for αs (mZ ) at N3+0 LL and N4+0 LL. Here,
we provide the corresponding plots for the qT spectrum and TNP pull plots. The Asimov
fit follows the same setup as in section 4.2.3. The results at N3+0 LL are shown in figure 12.
In the left panel, we observe a significant reduction in uncertainty from the pre-fit to the
post-fit bands. This reduction is particularly strong due to the high degree of correlation
in the fit. Such a reduction may be suspicious, and indeed, the TNP pull plot in the right
panel provides insights into the reasons for this behaviour. Some TNPs, particularly the
beam functions, become strongly constrained by the data. When the constraints on these
parameters become this tight, it suggests that the considered order may not be sufficient to
correctly account for the remaining theory uncertainties. This is an example of overfitting
the theory model, as previously discussed in section 4.2.3. Regarding the TNPs’ impacts
on αs (mZ ), we find that γν , S and Bqg have the strongest impact on αs . This is consistent

– 51 –

rel. difference to central N4LL[%]

10
3+0
LL vs N4LL post-fit
9 SCETlib N
pp → Z (8 TeV)
8
MSHTaN3LO, 80 < mll < 100 GeV, |Y | < 1.6
7
Γcusp
H
Bqg
6
S
5
γµ
total
4
B
total pre-fit
qq
γν
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30

qT [GeV]

∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
N

3+0

LL vs N LL
post-fit ∆αs
4

0.3

Z qT Asimov

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 1
Bqg
Bqq
S
H
γν
γµ
Γcusp

−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0

0.5

post fit constraint

1.0

1.5

rel. difference to central N4LL[%]

Figure 12. Left panel: Uncertainties in the qT spectrum at N3+0 LL relative to the N4 LL, before
(yellow band) and after (orange band) profiling the TNPs. The different lines show the post-fit
relative impact of each TNP. Right panel: Post-fit constraints on the TNPs (error bars) and their
impact on αs (mZ ), with the solid (dashed) grey band showing the impact of the post-fit downward
(upward) TNP variations.
∆αs(mZ ) [10−3]
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2

4

3

N

SCETlib N4+0LL vs N4LL post-fit
pp → Z (8 TeV)

2

H
S
Bqq

γµ
γν

LL vs N LL
post-fit ∆αs
4

0.3

Z qT Asimov

(ATLAS 8 TeV unc.)

∆θn = 1

MSHTaN3LO, 80 < mll < 100 GeV, |Y | < 1.6

Γcusp

4+0

Bqg

Bqg

Bqq

total
total pre-fit

S

1

H
γν

0
−1
0

γµ
Γcusp

5

10

15

20

25

30

−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0

0.5

post fit constraint

qT [GeV]

1.0

1.5

Figure 13. Left panel: Uncertainties in the qT spectrum at N4+0 LL relative to the N4 LL, before
(yellow band) and after (orange band) profiling the TNPs. The different lines show the post-fit
relative impact of each TNP. Right panel: Post-fit constraints on the TNPs (error bars) and their
impact on αs (mZ ), with the solid (dashed) grey band showing the impact of the post-fit downward
(upward) TNP variations.

with what we observed in the N3+1 LL case. In contrast, at N2+1 LL, the pattern of TNP
constraints and pulls was quite different.
The results for the N4+0 LL case are shown in figure 13. By construction, the central
N4+0 LL prediction is identical to that of N4 LL. The reduction in uncertainty across the qT

– 52 –

spectrum is less pronounced compared to the N3+0 LL case, and similarly the constraints
on the TNPs are no longer as tight as in the N3+0 LL case.
Both N3+0 LL and N4+0 LL may serve as viable alternatives to their respective Nm+1 LL
counterparts. While the difference in the resummation structure may only have a limited
effect on the overall theory uncertainty, they can impact the theory correlations, which
may not be fully captured. For this reason, whenever possible, it is preferable to use the
full Nm+1 LL prescription.

References
[1] D. d’Enterria et al., The strong coupling constant: state of the art and the decade ahead, J.
Phys. G 51 (2024) 090501 [2203.08271].
[2] Particle Data Group collaboration, S. Navas et al., Review of particle physics, Phys.
Rev. D 110 (2024) 030001.
[3] Flavour Lattice Averaging Group (FLAG) collaboration, Y. Aoki et al., FLAG
Review 2024, 2411.04268.
[4] S. Kluth, Tests of Quantum Chromo Dynamics at e+ e- Colliders, Rept. Prog. Phys. 69
(2006) 1771 [hep-ex/0603011].
[5] R. Abbate, M. Fickinger, A. H. Hoang, V. Mateu and I. W. Stewart, Thrust at N 3 LL with
Power Corrections and a Precision Global Fit for αs (mZ), Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 074021
[1006.3080].
[6] R. Abbate, M. Fickinger, A. H. Hoang, V. Mateu and I. W. Stewart, Precision Thrust
Cumulant Moments at N 3 LL, Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 094002 [1204.5746].
[7] M. A. Benitez, A. H. Hoang, V. Mateu, I. W. Stewart and G. Vita, On Determining
αs (mZ ) from Dijets in e+ e− Thrust, JHEP 07 (2025) 249 [2412.15164].
[8] T. Becher and M. D. Schwartz, A precise determination of αs from LEP thrust data using
effective field theory, JHEP 07 (2008) 034 [0803.0342].
[9] A. H. Hoang, D. W. Kolodrubetz, V. Mateu and I. W. Stewart, Precise determination of αs
from the C-parameter distribution, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 094018 [1501.04111].
[10] F. Caola, S. Ferrario Ravasio, G. Limatola, K. Melnikov, P. Nason and M. A. Ozcelik,
Linear power corrections to e+ e− shape variables in the three-jet region, JHEP 12 (2022)
062 [2204.02247].
[11] P. Nason and G. Zanderighi, Fits of αs using power corrections in the three-jet region,
JHEP 06 (2023) 058 [2301.03607].
[12] P. Nason and G. Zanderighi, Fits of αs from event-shapes in the three-jet region: extension
to all energies, JHEP 06 (2025) 200 [2501.18173].
[13] G. Bell, C. Lee, Y. Makris, J. Talbert and B. Yan, Effects of renormalon scheme and
perturbative scale choices on determinations of the strong coupling from e+e- event shapes,
Phys. Rev. D 109 (2024) 094008 [2311.03990].
[14] U. G. Aglietti, G. Ferrera, W.-L. Ju and J. Miao, Thrust distribution in electron-positron
annihilation at full NNNLL+NNLO (and beyond) in QCD, Phys. Rev. Lett. 134 (2025)
251904 [2502.01570].

– 53 –

[15] M. A. Benitez, A. Bhattacharya, A. H. Hoang, V. Mateu, M. D. Schwartz, I. W. Stewart
et al., A Precise Determination of αs from the Heavy Jet Mass Distribution, 2502.12253.
[16] ATLAS collaboration, Measurement of the Z/γ ∗ boson transverse momentum distribution
√
in pp collisions at s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 09 (2014) 145 [1406.3660].
[17] ATLAS collaboration, Measurement of the transverse momentum and ϕ∗η distributions of
√
Drell-Yan lepton pairs in proton-proton collisions at s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector,
Eur. Phys. J. C76 (2016) 291 [1512.02192].
[18] ATLAS collaboration, Measurement of the transverse momentum distribution of Drell-Yan
√
lepton pairs in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Eur.
Phys. J. C 80 (2020) 616 [1912.02844].
[19] ATLAS collaboration, A precise measurement of the Z-boson double-differential transverse
momentum and rapidity distributions in the full phase space of the decay leptons with the
√
ATLAS experiment at s = 8 TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C 84 (2024) 315 [2309.09318].
[20] CMS collaboration, Measurement of the Rapidity and Transverse Momentum Distributions
√
of Z Bosons in pp Collisions at s = 7 TeV, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 032002 [1110.4973].
[21] CMS collaboration, Measurement of the transverse momentum spectra of weak vector bosons
√
produced in proton-proton collisions at s = 8 TeV, JHEP 02 (2017) 096 [1606.05864].
[22] CMS collaboration, Measurements of differential Z boson production cross sections in
√
proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV, JHEP 12 (2019) 061 [1909.04133].
[23] LHCb collaboration, R. Aaij et al., Measurement of forward W and Z boson production in
√
pp collisions at s = 8 TeV, JHEP 01 (2016) 155 [1511.08039].
[24] LHCb collaboration, R. Aaij et al., Measurement of the forward Z boson production
√
cross-section in pp collisions at s = 13 TeV, JHEP 09 (2016) 136 [1607.06495].
[25] G. Billis, B. Dehnadi, M. A. Ebert, J. K. L. Michel and F. J. Tackmann, Higgs pT Spectrum
and Total Cross Section with Fiducial Cuts at Third Resummed and Fixed Order in QCD,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 (2021) 072001 [2102.08039].
[26] W.-L. Ju and M. Schönherr, The qT and ∆ϕ spectra in W and Z production at the LHC at
N3 LL’+N2 LO, JHEP 10 (2021) 088 [2106.11260].
[27] E. Re, L. Rottoli and P. Torrielli, Fiducial Higgs and Drell-Yan distributions at
N3 LL′ +NNLO with RadISH, JHEP 2109 (2021) 108 [2104.07509].
[28] X. Chen, T. Gehrmann, E. W. N. Glover, A. Huss, P. F. Monni, E. Re et al., Third-Order
Fiducial Predictions for Drell-Yan Production at the LHC, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128 (2022)
252001 [2203.01565].
[29] T. Neumann and J. Campbell, Fiducial Drell-Yan production at the LHC improved by
transverse-momentum resummation at N4LLp+N3LO, Phys. Rev. D 107 (2023) L011506
[2207.07056].
[30] S. Camarda, L. Cieri and G. Ferrera, Drell–Yan lepton-pair production: qT resummation at
N4LL accuracy, Phys. Lett. B 845 (2023) 138125 [2303.12781].
[31] V. Moos, I. Scimemi, A. Vladimirov and P. Zurita, Extraction of unpolarized transverse
momentum distributions from the fit of Drell-Yan data at N4 LL, JHEP 05 (2024) 036
[2305.07473].

– 54 –

[32] G. Billis, J. K. L. Michel and F. J. Tackmann, Drell-Yan Transverse-Momentum Spectra at
N3 LL′ and Approximate N4 LL with SCETlib, JHEP 02 (2025) 170 [2411.16004].
[33] ATLAS collaboration, A precise determination of the strong-coupling constant from the
√
recoil of Z bosons with the ATLAS experiment at s = 8 TeV, 2309.12986.
[34] F. J. Tackmann, Beyond scale variations: perturbative theory uncertainties from nuisance
parameters, JHEP 08 (2025) 098 [2411.18606].
[35] T.-J. Hou, J. Gao, T. Hobbs, K. Xie, S. Dulat, M. Guzzi et al., New cteq global analysis of
quantum chromodynamics with high-precision data from the lhc, Physical Review D 103
(2021) .
[36] S. Forte and Z. Kassabov, Why αs cannot be determined from hadronic processes without
simultaneously determining the parton distributions, Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2020) 182
[2001.04986].
[37] R. D. Ball, S. Carrazza, J. Cruz-Martinez, L. Del Debbio, S. Forte, T. Giani et al., The path
to proton structure at 1collaboration, The European Physical Journal C 82 (2022) .
[38] T. Cridge, L. A. Harland-Lang, A. D. Martin and R. S. Thorne, An investigation of the αS
and heavy quark mass dependence in the MSHT20 global PDF analysis, Eur. Phys. J. C 81
(2021) 744 [2106.10289].
[39] T. Cridge, L. A. Harland-Lang and R. S. Thorne, A first determination of the strong
coupling αS at approximate N3 LO order in a global PDF fit, Eur. Phys. J. C 84 (2024)
1009 [2404.02964].
[40] T. Cridge, G. Marinelli and F. J. Tackmann, The Treatment of PDF Uncertainties in the
Determination of Precise Parameters, to appear, DESY-25-xxx (2025) .
[41] C. F. Berger, C. Marcantonini, I. W. Stewart, F. J. Tackmann and W. J. Waalewijn, Higgs
Production with a Central Jet Veto at NNLL+NNLO, JHEP 04 (2011) 092 [1012.4480].
[42] I. W. Stewart and F. J. Tackmann, Theory Uncertainties for Higgs and Other Searches
Using Jet Bins, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 034011 [1107.2117].
[43] A. Banfi, G. P. Salam and G. Zanderighi, NLL+NNLO predictions for jet-veto efficiencies
in Higgs-boson and Drell-Yan production, JHEP 06 (2012) 159 [1203.5773].
[44] S. Gangal and F. J. Tackmann, Next-to-leading-order uncertainties in Higgs+2 jets from
gluon fusion, Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013) 093008 [1302.5437].
[45] I. W. Stewart, F. J. Tackmann, J. R. Walsh and S. Zuberi, Jet pT resummation in Higgs
production at NNLL′ +NNLO, Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 054001 [1307.1808].
[46] LHC Higgs Cross Section Working Group collaboration, D. de Florian et al.,
Handbook of LHC Higgs Cross Sections: 4. Deciphering the Nature of the Higgs Sector,
1610.07922.
[47] Les Houches 2017: Physics at TeV Colliders Standard Model Working Group Report, 3,
2018.
[48] J. M. Lindert et al., Precise predictions for V + jets dark matter backgrounds, Eur. Phys. J.
C 77 (2017) 829 [1705.04664].
[49] L. A. Harland-Lang and R. S. Thorne, On the Consistent Use of Scale Variations in PDF
Fits and Predictions, Eur. Phys. J. C 79 (2019) 225 [1811.08434].

– 55 –

[50] NNPDF collaboration, R. Abdul Khalek et al., Parton Distributions with Theory
Uncertainties: General Formalism and First Phenomenological Studies, Eur. Phys. J. C 79
(2019) 931 [1906.10698].
[51] W. Bizon, A. Gehrmann-De Ridder, T. Gehrmann, N. Glover, A. Huss, P. F. Monni et al.,
The transverse momentum spectrum of weak gauge bosons at N3 LL + NNLO, Eur. Phys. J.
C 79 (2019) 868 [1905.05171].
[52] M. A. Ebert, J. K. L. Michel, I. W. Stewart and F. J. Tackmann, Drell-Yan qT
resummation of fiducial power corrections at N3 LL, JHEP 04 (2021) 102 [2006.11382].
[53] M. Cacciari and N. Houdeau, Meaningful characterisation of perturbative theoretical
uncertainties, JHEP 09 (2011) 039 [1105.5152].
[54] E. Bagnaschi, M. Cacciari, A. Guffanti and L. Jenniches, An extensive survey of the
estimation of uncertainties from missing higher orders in perturbative calculations, JHEP
02 (2015) 133 [1409.5036].
[55] M. Bonvini, Probabilistic definition of the perturbative theoretical uncertainty from missing
higher orders, Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2020) 989 [2006.16293].
[56] C. Duhr, A. Huss, A. Mazeliauskas and R. Szafron, An analysis of Bayesian estimates for
missing higher orders in perturbative calculations, JHEP 09 (2021) 122 [2106.04585].
[57] A. David and G. Passarino, How well can we guess theoretical uncertainties?, Phys. Lett. B
726 (2013) 266 [1307.1843].
[58] A. Ghosh, B. Nachman, T. Plehn, L. Shire, T. M. P. Tait and D. Whiteson, Statistical
patterns of theory uncertainties, SciPost Phys. Core 6 (2023) 045 [2210.15167].
[59] J. McGowan, T. Cridge, L. A. Harland-Lang and R. S. Thorne, Approximate N3 LO parton
distribution functions with theoretical uncertainties: MSHT20aN3 LO PDFs, Eur. Phys. J.
C 83 (2023) 185 [2207.04739].
[60] B. Dehnadi, I. Novikov and F. J. Tackmann, The photon energy spectrum in B → Xs γ at
N3 LL′ , JHEP 07 (2023) 214 [2211.07663].
[61] P. Cal, M. A. Lim, D. J. Scott, F. J. Tackmann and W. J. Waalewijn, Jet veto resummation
for STXS H+1-jet bins at aNNLL′ +NNLO, JHEP 03 (2025) 155 [2408.13301].
[62] CMS collaboration, High-precision measurement of the W boson mass with the CMS
experiment at the LHC, 2412.13872.
[63] M. A. Lim and R. Poncelet, Robust estimates of theoretical uncertainties at fixed-order in
perturbation theory, 2412.14910.
[64] T. Clark, S. Gangal and J. R. Gaunt, The Drell-Yan Process at NNLL′ +NNLO using
Rapidity Dependent Jet Vetoes, JHEP 08 (2025) 060 [2504.06353].
[65] P. Pietrulewicz, D. Samitz, A. Spiering and F. J. Tackmann, Factorization and
Resummation for Massive Quark Effects in Exclusive Drell-Yan, JHEP 08 (2017) 114
[1703.09702].
[66] B. Dehnadi, P. Ploessl and F. J. Tackmann, “Flavor thresholds and quark-mass effects in
the Collins-Soper kernel.” 2025.
[67] L. Cieri, G. Ferrera and G. F. R. Sborlini, Combining QED and QCD transverse-momentum
resummation for Z boson production at hadron colliders, JHEP 08 (2018) 165 [1805.11948].

– 56 –

[68] G. Billis, F. J. Tackmann and J. Talbert, Higher-Order Sudakov Resummation in Coupled
Gauge Theories, JHEP 03 (2020) 182 [1907.02971].
[69] A. Autieri, L. Cieri, G. Ferrera and G. F. R. Sborlini, Combining QED and QCD
transverse-momentum resummation for W and Z boson production at hadron colliders,
JHEP 07 (2023) 104 [2302.05403].
[70] L. Buonocore, L. Rottoli and P. Torrielli, Resummation of combined QCD-electroweak
effects in Drell Yan lepton-pair production, JHEP 07 (2024) 193 [2404.15112].
[71] M. A. Ebert, J. K. L. Michel, F. J. Tackmann et al., SCETlib: A C++ Package for
Numerical Calculations in QCD and Soft-Collinear Effective Theory, DESY-17-099 (2018) .
[72] G. Billis, M. A. Ebert, J. K. L. Michel and F. J. Tackmann, A toolbox for qT and 0-jettiness
subtractions at N3 LO, Eur. Phys. J. Plus 136 (2021) 214 [1909.00811].
[73] J. C. Collins and D. E. Soper, Back-To-Back Jets in QCD, Nucl. Phys. B193 (1981) 381.
[74] J. C. Collins and D. E. Soper, Back-To-Back Jets: Fourier Transform from B to
K-Transverse, Nucl. Phys. B197 (1982) 446.
[75] J. C. Collins, D. E. Soper and G. F. Sterman, Transverse Momentum Distribution in
Drell-Yan Pair and W and Z Boson Production, Nucl. Phys. B250 (1985) 199.
[76] J. Collins, Foundations of perturbative QCD, Cambridge monographs on particle physics,
nuclear physics, and cosmology. Cambridge Univ. Press, New York, NY, 2011.
[77] C. W. Bauer, S. Fleming and M. E. Luke, Summing Sudakov logarithms in B → Xs γ in
effective field theory, Phys. Rev. D63 (2000) 014006 [hep-ph/0005275].
[78] C. W. Bauer, S. Fleming, D. Pirjol and I. W. Stewart, An Effective field theory for collinear
and soft gluons: Heavy to light decays, Phys. Rev. D63 (2001) 114020 [hep-ph/0011336].
[79] C. W. Bauer, D. Pirjol and I. W. Stewart, Soft collinear factorization in effective field
theory, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 054022 [hep-ph/0109045].
[80] C. W. Bauer, S. Fleming, D. Pirjol, I. Z. Rothstein and I. W. Stewart, Hard scattering
factorization from effective field theory, Phys. Rev. D66 (2002) 014017 [hep-ph/0202088].
[81] T. Becher and M. Neubert, Drell-Yan Production at Small qT , Transverse Parton
Distributions and the Collinear Anomaly, Eur. Phys. J. C71 (2011) 1665 [1007.4005].
[82] M. G. Echevarria, A. Idilbi and I. Scimemi, Factorization Theorem For Drell-Yan At Low
qT And Transverse Momentum Distributions On-The-Light-Cone, JHEP 07 (2012) 002
[1111.4996].
[83] J.-Y. Chiu, A. Jain, D. Neill and I. Z. Rothstein, A Formalism for the Systematic Treatment
of Rapidity Logarithms in Quantum Field Theory, JHEP 05 (2012) 084 [1202.0814].
[84] Y. Li, D. Neill and H. X. Zhu, An exponential regulator for rapidity divergences, Nucl. Phys.
B 960 (2020) 115193 [1604.00392].
[85] G. Lustermans, J. K. L. Michel, F. J. Tackmann and W. J. Waalewijn, Joint
two-dimensional resummation in qT and 0-jettiness at NNLL, JHEP 03 (2019) 124
[1901.03331].
[86] R. Boussarie et al., TMD Handbook, 2304.03302.
[87] M. Schlemmer, A. Vladimirov, C. Zimmermann, M. Engelhardt and A. Schäfer,

– 57 –

Determination of the Collins-Soper Kernel from Lattice QCD, JHEP 08 (2021) 004
[2103.16991].
[88] Lattice Parton (LPC) collaboration, M.-H. Chu et al., Nonperturbative determination of
the Collins-Soper kernel from quasitransverse-momentum-dependent wave functions, Phys.
Rev. D 106 (2022) 034509 [2204.00200].
[89] A. Avkhadiev, P. E. Shanahan, M. L. Wagman and Y. Zhao, Collins-Soper kernel from
lattice QCD at the physical pion mass, Phys. Rev. D 108 (2023) 114505 [2307.12359].
[90] Lattice Parton (LPC) collaboration, M.-H. Chu et al., Lattice calculation of the
intrinsic soft function and the Collins-Soper kernel, JHEP 08 (2023) 172 [2306.06488].
[91] H.-T. Shu, M. Schlemmer, T. Sizmann, A. Vladimirov, L. Walter, M. Engelhardt et al.,
Universality of the Collins-Soper kernel in lattice calculations, Phys. Rev. D 108 (2023)
074519 [2302.06502].
[92] A. Avkhadiev, P. E. Shanahan, M. L. Wagman and Y. Zhao, Determination of the
Collins-Soper Kernel from Lattice QCD, Phys. Rev. Lett. 132 (2024) 231901 [2402.06725].
[93] J. C. Collins and D. E. Soper, Parton Distribution and Decay Functions, Nucl. Phys. B194
(1982) 445.
[94] J. Collins and T. Rogers, Understanding the large-distance behavior of
transverse-momentum-dependent parton densities and the Collins-Soper evolution kernel,
Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 074020 [1412.3820].
[95] J. Collins, L. Gamberg, A. Prokudin, T. C. Rogers, N. Sato and B. Wang, Relating
Transverse Momentum Dependent and Collinear Factorization Theorems in a Generalized
Formalism, Phys. Rev. D 94 (2016) 034014 [1605.00671].
[96] A. A. Vladimirov, Self-contained definition of the Collins-Soper kernel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125
(2020) 192002 [2003.02288].
[97] M. A. Ebert, J. K. L. Michel, I. W. Stewart and Z. Sun, Disentangling long and short
distances in momentum-space TMDs, JHEP 07 (2022) 129 [2201.07237].
[98] S. Ferrario Ravasio, G. Limatola and P. Nason, Infrared renormalons in kinematic
distributions for hadron collider processes, JHEP 06 (2021) 018 [2011.14114].
[99] A. Bacchetta, G. Bozzi, M. Radici, M. Ritzmann and A. Signori, Effect of
Flavor-Dependent Partonic Transverse Momentum on the Determination of the W Boson
Mass in Hadronic Collisions, Phys. Lett. B 788 (2019) 542 [1807.02101].
[100] MAP collaboration, A. Bacchetta, V. Bertone, C. Bissolotti, G. Bozzi, M. Cerutti,
F. Delcarro et al., Flavor dependence of unpolarized quark transverse momentum
distributions from a global fit, JHEP 08 (2024) 232 [2405.13833].
[101] F. James and M. Roos, Minuit: A System for Function Minimization and Analysis of the
Parameter Errors and Correlations, Comput. Phys. Commun. 10 (1975) 343.
[102] W. C. Davidon, Variable metric method for minimization, .
[103] F. James and M. Winkler, MINUIT User’s Guide, .
[104] G. Cowan, K. Cranmer, E. Gross and O. Vitells, Asymptotic formulae for likelihood-based
tests of new physics, Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1554 [1007.1727].
[105] R. D. Cousins and L. Wasserman, PHYSTAT Informal Review: Marginalizing versus
Profiling of Nuisance Parameters, 2404.17180.

– 58 –

[106] H. Paukkunen and P. Zurita, Pdf reweighting in the hessian matrix approach, Journal of
High Energy Physics 2014 (2014) .
[107] S. Camarda, P. Belov, A. M. Cooper-Sarkar, C. Diaconu, A. Glazov, A. Guffanti et al., Qcd
analysis of w- and z-boson production at tevatron, 2015.
[108] C. Willis, R. Brock, D. Hayden, T.-J. Hou, J. Isaacson, C. Schmidt et al., New method for
reducing parton distribution function uncertainties in the high-mass Drell-Yan spectrum,
Phys. Rev. D 99 (2019) 054004 [1809.09481].
[109] S. Catani, D. de Florian and M. Grazzini, Universality of nonleading logarithmic
contributions in transverse momentum distributions, Nucl. Phys. B 596 (2001) 299
[hep-ph/0008184].
[110] G. Bozzi, S. Catani, D. de Florian and M. Grazzini, Transverse-momentum resummation
and the spectrum of the Higgs boson at the LHC, Nucl. Phys. B 737 (2006) 73
[hep-ph/0508068].
[111] A. Cooper-Sarkar, T. Cridge, F. Giuli, L. A. Harland-Lang, F. Hekhorn, J. Huston et al., A
Benchmarking of QCD Evolution at Approximate N 3 LO, 2406.16188.
[112] S. Camarda et al., DYTurbo: Fast predictions for Drell-Yan processes, Eur. Phys. J. C 80
(2020) 251 [1910.07049].

– 59 –

